BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

Suspension of: 

CODY WALKER, Moving Party, 

A Permanent Certificated Employee and 

WHEATLAND UNION HIGH SCHOOL DISTRICT, Responding 

Party. 

OAH No. 2022031051 

ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 

SUSPENSION 

On April 22, 2022, a telephonic hearing on the motion filed by Cody Walker for 

immediate reversal of suspension (Motion) was held by Julie Cabos-Owen, 

Administrative Law Judge (ALJ), Office of Administrative Hearings (OAH), in Los 

Angeles. Eric Lindstrom, Attorney at Law, with Langenkamp, Curtis, Price, Lindstrom & 

Chevedden, represented moving party Cody Walker (Employee or Respondent). 

Lindsay K. Moore, Attorney at Law, with Kingsley Bogard, LLP, represented responding 

party Wheatland Union High School District (District). 

On March 18, 2022, the District filed a Statement of Charges (SOC) against 

Employee and immediately suspended him without pay pending the outcome of its 

action to dismiss him. The bases for the suspension under Education Code section 

44939 are: willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, as 

prescribed by reasonable rules and regulations of the employing school district, and 

immoral conduct. (The SOC also alleges the following grounds for dismissal under 

Education Code section 44932: dishonesty; evident unfitness for service; and persistent 

violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of the state or reasonable regulations 

prescribed by the State Board of Education or the school district.) 

The SOC alleges Employee’s Agricultural Mechanics and Construction class built 

and sold fire pits for a fundraiser, with payment for supplies taken from, and proceeds 

from sales deposited into, the Agricultural Mechanics ASB Fund (Fund). The SOC 

further alleges, in Spring 2021, Employee engaged in “misconduct supporting 

termination” (SOC, p. 7) by using “the District’s shop for his own personal business 

and/or financial gain, us[ing] District supplies for his personal gain, mislead[ing] at 

least one community member when selling a fire pit, and misappropriate[ing] money 

from the sale of fire pits made for the Ag Mechanics fundraiser.” (

.) Regarding the 

purported misconduct, the SOC specifically alleges Employee received money from the 

sale of at least two firepits and the proceeds from those sales were not deposited into 

the Fund; Employee owns a custom fabrication business, and he used shop equipment 

and students in his class to produce a metal fence décor sold to another employee, 

but the proceeds from that sale were not deposited into the Fund; and Employee 

failed to follow the proper surplus process for a tractor donation. Another District 

employee brought Employee’s misconduct to the attention of the Superintendent. The 

SOC does not specify which conduct constitutes immoral conduct and/or willful refusal 

to perform regular assignments. 

2

On March 24, 2022, Employee filed the Motion, seeking the immediate reversal 

of his unpaid suspension, contending the charges in the SOC do not constitute either 

immoral conduct or willful refusal to perform regular assignments, and the District has 

not met the statutory requirements of Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b). 

On April 8, 2022, after receipt of the Motion, District served an Amended 

Statement of Charges (ASOC) on Employee. The ASOC restates the bases for dismissal 

and the factual allegations set forth in the SOC, with additional factual allegations 

relating to Employee’s work in food service delivery between March 13 and June 4, 

2020, when school instruction was conducted only through virtual learning. The newly 

alleged conduct in the ASOC occurred prior to service of the SOC and the notice of 

immediate unpaid suspension on Employee. 

On April 12, 2022, District filed its opposition to the Motion, citing both the new 

allegations of the ASOC and the original allegations of the SOC (as re-alleged in the 

ASOC) in support of its immediate suspension of Employee without pay. In his reply, 

filed on April 19, 2022, and in oral argument, Employee requested the ALJ ignore the 

new factual allegations contained in the ASOC and limit the analysis of the propriety of 

Employee’s suspension to the allegations in the SOC. Additionally, Employee asserted 

the new allegations, even if considered, do not amount to conduct that is either 

immoral or a willful refusal by Employee to perform regular assignments without 

cause, thus failing to satisfy Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b), 

requirements for immediate suspension. 

The ALJ reviewed and considered the SOC, the written submissions of the 

parties, and oral argument made during the hearing. The Motion is denied as set forth 

below. 

3

Motions for Immediate Reversal of Suspension 

Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b), provides that a school district 

may immediately suspend a permanent certificated employee who has been charged 

with, among other things, immoral conduct or willful refusal to perform regular 

assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and 

regulations of the State Board of Education or the employing school district. Education 

Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), allows a suspended employee to file a motion 

for review of the suspension, and review of that motion “shall be limited to a 

determination as to whether the facts as alleged in the statement of charges, if true, 

are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension under this section.” 

A motion such as the current Motion, made pursuant to Education Code section 

44939, subdivision (c)(1), is analogous to a demurrer because the properly pleaded 

facts must be accepted as true for purposes of resolving the motion. However, the ALJ 

need not accept “contentions, deductions or conclusions of fact or law.” (

 (1985) 39 Cal.3d 311, 318.) Additionally, as with a demurrer, the Motion can be 

granted if the District’s “conclusory characterization of [Employee’s] conduct as 

intentional, willful and fraudulent” is “patently insufficient.” (See e.g., 

 (1977) 73 Cal.App.3d 864, 872.) 

New Allegations Brought after Suspension without Pay 

The new factual allegations asserted in the ASOC should not be considered in 

determining whether District’s suspension of Employee met the statutory requirements 

of Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b). The District’s immediate suspension 

of Employee was based on the factual allegations in the SOC, not the new allegations 

of misconduct asserted in the ASOC, brought after Employee was already suspended.

4

Nothing in Education Code section 44939 permits the retroactive application of new 

allegations made after the initial statement of charges to support the original 

suspension order. (

(1968) 

263 Cal.App.2d 784, 789 [statutes pertaining to teacher discipline should be “strictly 

construed”].) The appeal procedures set forth in Education Code section 44939, 

subdivision (c), are predicated on service of the “initial pleading” in the matter. (Ed. 

Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(2) [“The motion shall be served upon the governing board of 

the school district and filed with the Office of Administrative Hearings within 30 days 

after service upon the employee of the 

of the matter.” (Emphasis 

added).]) Any other result would allow a school district to continually amend its 

charges to address any pleading deficiencies pointed out by Employee and maintain a 

teacher’s suspension indefinitely. Such action would contravene the apparent intent of 

Education Code section 44939 to provide an efficient and cost-effective procedure for 

determining the propriety of immediate suspensions without pay. 

Willful Refusal to Perform Regular Assignments without Reasonable 

Cause 

In analyzing whether cause exists for Employee’s immediate suspension under 

Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b), for “willful refusal to perform regular 

assignments without reasonable cause,” a comparison to Education Code section 

44932, subdivision (a), is informative. Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(8) 

(persistent violation of, of or refusal to obey, school laws or the district’s reasonable 

regulations), authorizes a teacher’s dismissal, but not immediate unpaid suspension. 

Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b), allows immediate suspension only if 

the refusal to perform regular assignments was “willful.” The statute’s use of the words 

“willful refusal” rather than “persistent violation” indicates that, although repeated 

5

performance failures may establish grounds for dismissing a teacher under Education 

Code section 44932, such continuing failures are not grounds for immediate 

suspension under Education Code section 44939. 

The Education Code, in creating the separate grounds and procedures for 

dismissal versus immediate suspension, contemplates a distinction between two types 

of cases. In narrowing the substantive grounds for immediate suspension and creating 

additional due process protections for the employee, Education Code section 44939, 

subdivision (b), requires a higher threshold to justify immediate suspension than the 

threshold for dismissal set forth in Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a). 

To establish grounds for immediate suspension under Education Code section 

44939, Employee’s refusal to perform his regular assignment must have been “willful.” 

In the context of a public employee’s insubordination or “willful” misconduct, the term 

insubordination “carries a volitional coloration which excludes the notion of accidental 

or even negligent conduct. . . [and] insubordination, equally with willful misconduct, 

requires proof of intent or willfulness. The latter elements imply that the person knows 

what he is doing and intends to do what he is doing.” (

. 

(1963) 215 Cal. App. 2d 770, 775.) Consequently, a willful refusal to perform a regular 

assignment must be more than an unsatisfactory, unprofessional, negligent, or even 

persistent failure to perform a regular assignment. Instead, it must be an intentional, 

volitional refusal to perform any part of a regular assignment. 

The SOC alleges Employee failed to follow District policies and regulations when 

selling firepits for fundraising, using District equipment, and handling the surplus 

process for a tractor donation. However, the SOC contains no specific allegation that 

Employee willfully refused to perform his regular assignments. Instead, the SOC 

generally alleges Employee’s “misconduct, as described above establishes the 

6

following causes for his dismissal [and] immediate suspension pursuant to Education 

Code sections 44932 and 44938: [1] Immoral conduct, including, but not limited to 

egregious misconduct; [2] Dishonesty; [3] Evident unfitness for service; [4] Persistent 

violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of the state or reasonable regulations 

prescribed for the government of the public schools by the state board or by the 

governing board of the school district employing him or her; [5] Willful refusal to 

perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable 

rules and regulations of the employing school district.” (SOC, p. 11.) This general 

assertion is conclusory, without specifically indicating how Employee’s conduct

constitutes an intentional and deliberate refusal to perform his regular assignment. As 

noted above, conclusory characterizations of conduct as intentional or willful are not 

binding on the ALJ and need not be accepted. Consequently, the SOC does not 

sufficiently plead Employee’s “willful refusal to perform regular assignments without 

reasonable cause.” 

Based on the foregoing, the facts alleged in the SOC, if true, are insufficient to 

establish a basis for Employee’s immediate suspension under Education Code section 

44939, subdivision (b), for willful refusal to perform regular assignments. 

Immoral Conduct 

“Immoral conduct” has been defined as conduct “which is hostile to the welfare 

of the general public and contrary to good morals. [It] has not been confined to sexual 

matters, but includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, 

indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; or as willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct 

showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the community, 

and as an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public welfare.” (

 (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 

7

811 [

]; 

 (1970) 9 Cal. App.3d 967, 972 

[

].) The term “immoral conduct” has been used interchangeably with the term 

“moral turpitude” which in turn is sometimes used as synonymous with dishonesty or a 

high degree of unfairness. (

179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811.) 

The SOC alleges, among other things, that Employee “misappropriated money 

from the sale of fire pits made for the Ag Mechanics fundraiser.” (SOC, p. 7.) 

Misappropriation, i.e., theft, reflects dishonesty and is an act of moral turpitude. (See 

e.g., 

 (1992) 4 Cal. 4th 284, 289 [“Grand theft reflects dishonesty and 

is a crime involving moral turpitude.”]; 

 (1944) 25 Cal.2d 588 [petty theft 

is a crime of moral turpitude].) Employee’s alleged misappropriation was dishonest, 

evidences a moral indifference to the opinions of others, and demonstrates an 

inconsiderate attitude towards good order and the public welfare. As defined in 

general, Employee’s alleged misappropriation of funds constitutes immoral conduct. 

However, the determination of what constitutes immoral conduct must be 

contextual. As noted in 

(1969) 1 Cal. 3d 214, 224 

(

), “immoral conduct” is not “considered in the abstract. It must be considered 

in the context in which the Legislature considered it, as conduct which is hostile . . . to 

the welfare of the school community.” The 

court determined a teacher’s 

actions cannot constitute immoral conduct or conduct involving moral turpitude 

unless those actions indicate his unfitness to teach. Given the Education Code’s 

additional due process protections and higher threshold to justify immediate 

suspension, the SOC should be required to sufficiently allege facts demonstrating a 

nexus to teaching, just as would be required for dismissal. 

In conducting this analysis, it is important to note that teachers act as role 

models for students. As noted in 

, 41 Cal.2d 546, at 552, “A 

8

teacher . . . in the public school system is regarded by the public and pupils in the light 

of an examplar, whose words and actions are likely to be followed by the (students) 

coming under her care and protection. . . . Lessons are learned from example as well as 

from precept.” 

The SOC sufficiently alleges an unfitness to teach. Employee’s alleged 

misappropriation of District funds was antithetical to his role as an example for 

students, was hostile to the welfare of the school community, and shows a disregard 

for the impact of his conduct on students and on the District. 

The 

 Court provided a list of possible factors to aid in the analysis as 

follows: 

In determining whether the teacher's conduct thus indicates 

unfitness to teach the board may consider as the likelihood 

that the conduct may have adversely affected students or 

fellow teachers, the degree of such adversity anticipated, 

the proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct, the 

type of teaching certificate held by the party involved, the 

extenuating or aggravating circumstances, if any, 

surrounding the conduct, the praiseworthiness or 

blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the conduct, 

the likelihood of the recurrence of the questioned conduct, 

and the extent to which disciplinary action may inflict an 

adverse impact or chilling effect upon the constitutional 

rights of the teacher involved or other teachers. These 

factors are relevant to the extent that they assist the board 

in determining a teacher's fitness to teach. 

9 

(1 Cal. 3d 214, 229-230. Emphasis added.)

Employee argues, and District disagrees, that the factors articulated in 

are applicable in determining the propriety of an immediate suspension. The 

factors have been provided to assist in the required analysis of whether conduct has a 

sufficient nexus with teaching to warrant adverse employment action. However, 

does not require that any or all factors be utilized and met. Nevertheless, for 

this inquiry, the factors are reviewed to the extent they assist in determining whether 

Employee’s immoral conduct, as alleged, indicates his unfitness to teach.

The allegations in the SOC satisfy enough of the 

factors to further 

demonstrate an unfitness to teach. The SOC alleges activity occurring on a District 

campus, involving Employee’s abuse of his certificated position to misappropriate 

funds belonging to the District students’ fund, which may adversely impact students 

who have been deprived of those funds. The alleged misappropriation was purportedly 

known to at least one other employee, and it is proximate in time, occurring about one 

year ago. Moreover, there is nothing praiseworthy, instead only blameworthy, about 

Employee’s alleged misappropriation. 

Based on the foregoing, the facts alleged in the SOC, if true, are sufficient to 

establish a basis for Employee’s immediate suspension under Education Code section 

44939, subdivision (b), for immoral conduct.

// 

//

10 

 
Disposition

Since the District has pleaded facts which, if true, support a cause for immediate 

unpaid suspension for immoral conduct, the motion is denied.

IT IS SO ORDERED.

DATE:

JULIE CABOS-OWEN

Administrative Law Judge

Office of Administrative Hearings

11

