BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

Suspension Filed by: 

MONICA AGUILAR, a Permanent Certificated Employee, 

v. 

RIVERSIDE UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 

OAH No. 2022110231 

ORDER GRANTING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 

SUSPENSION 

(Ed. Code, ยง 44939, subd. (c)(4)) 

Administrative Law Judge Sarah Sandford-Smith, State of California, Office of 

Administrative Hearings, heard oral argument on this motion for immediate reversal of 

suspension (MIRS) on December 2, 2022, by videoconference. 

Ilissa B. Gold, Attorney with Reich, Adell & Cvitan, represented Monica Aguilar, 

the moving party. 

Jonathan Salt and Lisa Martin, Attorneys with Fagen, Friedman & Fulfrost, LLP, 

represented the Riverside Unified School District (District). 

Prior to oral argument, the moving party submitted a Request for Judicial 

Notice of three items. The District opposed the request. The administrative law judge 

denied the request. 

PROCEDURAL HISTORY 

A statement of charges was filed and served against the moving party Monica 

Aguilar pursuant to Education Code section 44932, alleging six causes for dismissal: 1) 

unprofessional conduct; 2) dishonesty; 3) unsatisfactory performance; 4) evident 

unfitness for service; 5) persistent violation of or refusal to obey school laws; and 5) 

willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause. The District 

placed her on immediate suspension without pay pursuant to Education Code section 

44939, based upon the allegations of willful refusal to perform regular assignments 

without reasonable cause. 

The moving party filed a timely motion for immediate reversal of her 

suspension without pay, pursuant to Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1). 

She argues that the District has not alleged a sufficient basis to place her on 

immediate unpaid status because the allegations in the statement of charges do not 

establish that she engaged in willful refusal to perform regular assignments without 

reasonable cause. 

DISCUSSION 

Pursuant to Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1),  review of a 

motion filed pursuant to this section shall be limited to a determination as to whether 

the facts as alleged in the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a 

2 

basis for immediate suspension under this section.  Although well-pleaded facts must 

be accepted as true for purposes of this motion, the administrative law judge need not 

accept  contentions, deductions or conclusions of fact or law.

 (1985) 

39 Cal.3d 311, 318.) 

Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b), provides that a school district 

may immediately suspend a permanent employee of the school district who has been 

charged  with immoral conduct, conviction of a felony or of any crime involving moral 

turpitude, with incompetency due to mental disability, with willful refusal to perform 

regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and  

regulations of the School District, or with violation of [Education Code] section 

The term  willful contains a volitional aspect. (

(1963) 215 Cal.App.2d 770, 775.) A refusal must be  conscious, intentional and 

deliberate to be willful. (

 (1958) 157 

Cal.App.2d 252, 257.) Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b), also requires such 

willful refusal to be without good cause. 

The allegations in the Statement of Charges indicate that Aguilar persistently 

failed to meet the District s expectations of her performance and persistently failed to 

comply with the District s directives for improvement. The allegations also indicate that 

Aguilar was dishonest in her communications with her supervisor, other District 

employees and parents. However, these charges do not support a basis for immediate 

suspension under Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b). 

Where the pleadings allege a willful refusal to perform a regular assignment, the 

allegations are conclusory and do not contain the factual content which, if true, would 

constitute a willful state of mind or deliberate refusal to perform regular assignments 

3 

 
without good cause. Instead, the District asserts that Aguilar s willful state of mind can 

be inferred from her dishonesty and her failures to comply with the District s 

expectations and directives. Such inferences and conclusory allegations are not 

binding on the administrative law judge and need not be accepted.

The written submissions and oral argument of the parties have been considered.

The facts alleged in the statement of charges may constitute grounds for discipline 

pursuant to Education Code section 44932, but do not reflect willful refusal.

ORDER

Good cause having been established, the motion for immediate reversal of 

suspension is GRANTED. The District s immediate suspension of Monica Aguilar is 

REVERSED. The District shall make her whole for any lost wages, benefits, and 

compensation within 14 days after service of this Order. (Ed. Code, ยง 44939, subd. 

(c)(5).)

DATE:

SARAH SANDFORD-SMITH

Administrative Law Judge

Office of Administrative Hearings

4

