BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINSTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

Suspension of: 

LINDA PAPPAS, a permanent certificated employee, 

Moving Party, 

and 

GALT JOINT UNION ELEMENTARY SCHOOL DISTRICT, 

Responding Party. 

OAH No. 2022100554 

ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 

SUSPENSION 

Administrative Law Judge Deena R. Ghaly, Office of Administrative Hearings 

(OAH), State of California, heard this matter telephonically from Los Angeles, California 

on November 18, 2022. 

Attorney Matthew Chevedden, Langencamp, Curtis, & Price represented moving 

party Linda Pappas (Respondent). 

Christian M. Keiner and Chelsea Tibbs, Dannis, Woliver Kelly, represented 

responding party Galt Joint Union Elementary School District (District).

BACKGROUND 

Respondent is a permanent certificated employee of the District, assigned to 

teach special education at Vernon E. Greer Elementary School. On September 22, 2022, 

the District issued a Statement of Charges and Notice of Immediate Suspension 

Without Pay and Charges for Dismissal (SOC). The SOC charges Respondent with 

immoral conduct, unprofessional conduct, evident unfitness for service, and persistent 

violation of, and refusal to, obey applicable laws or the District’s or the school board’s 

regulations (willful refusal). 

The charges are based on the following alleged conduct: (i) on August 22, 2018, 

Respondent “physically re-directed” a student; (ii) after a school official had instructed 

Respondent not to place her hands on students unless it was to ensure their 

protection or safety, on January 16, 2019, Respondent was observed plugging the nose 

of a student in an attempt to compel the student to comply with direction during a 

dental screening; (iii) after further instruction to Respondent, including review of Board 

and school directives with her, on October 24, 2019, the school principal observed 

Respondent appearing frustrated and unable to provide support for a threatened 

student; (iv) on January 12, 2022, a student reported Respondent stated “you try to get 

out of shit” and “you are gay;” and (v) on August 22, 2022, Respondent stated to a 

student, “no, I will spank your hand.”

Respondent demanded a hearing on the dismissal and filed a motion for 

immediate reversal of the suspension (MIRS) under Education Code section 44939, 

2

subdivision (c)(1). The District filed opposition to the motion, and counsel for both 

parties presented oral argument at the motion hearing.

Respondent’s Contentions 

Respondent asserts the SOC’s factual allegations, even if true, are insufficient to 

constitute a basis for immediate suspension without pay. Respondent contends the 

factual allegations are too vague and broad to support an allegation of immoral 

conduct, which she maintains are limited to certain categories of wrongdoing. 

Respondent also contends allegations of using inappropriate language such as swear 

words cannot support a charge of immoral conduct in the context of teacher 

disciplinary proceedings. Regarding the willful refusal charge, Respondent asserts the 

District failed to properly plead it as grounds for placing Respondent on an unpaid 

suspension pending the dismissal hearing, arguing this charge fails as a basis for 

immediate suspension in the absence of pled facts establishing a willful state of mind 

to be insubordinate. 

The District’s Contentions 

The District asserts that its SOC alleges sufficient facts constituting immoral 

conduct and willful refusal as causes for dismissal and immediate suspension, pursuant 

to Education Code section 44939. The District argues there are no specific limitations 

on what can constitute “immoral conduct” in the context of teacher discipline and cites 

authority, 

327 holding to the contrary.

 (2020) 53 Cal.App.5th 

Regarding whether the SOC is sufficiently specific in setting out facts to 

establish either immoral conduct or willful refusal, the District asserts it is not required 

to specify the details surrounding, and evidence supporting, the charges at issue and 

3

that the SOC need only provide the employee with sufficient notice to the end that the 

Respondent will be able to prepare a defense

LEGAL STANDARDS 

General Provisions 

A school district may immediately suspend without pay a permanent certificated 

employee who has been charged with ”immoral conduct, conviction of a felony or of 

any crime involving moral turpitude, with incompetency due to mental disability, with 

[willful refusal]” or with advocating communism. (Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (b).)

Suspended teachers may file a motion for immediate reversal of the suspension 

with the Office of Administrative Hearings. (Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(1).) An 

administrative law judge reviews the motion, and the review “shall be limited to a 

determination as to whether the facts as alleged in the statement of charges, if true, 

are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension under this section.” (

) 

Immoral Conduct 

Immoral conduct is conduct “‘hostile to the welfare of the general public and 

contrary to good morals. Immorality has not been confined to sexual matters, but 

includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, 

depravity, dissoluteness; or as willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral 

indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the community, and as an 

inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public welfare.’” (

(1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811, quoting 

(1951) 36 Cal.2d 734, 740.)

4

Though not all conduct involving inappropriate language has been deemed 

immoral, there is no absolute prohibition on basing charges of immoral conduct on 

use of language. (See, e.g. 

(

) (1970) 9 Cal.App.3d 967). In 

, a junior college teacher who 

used vulgar language such as “whore” and “whorehouse.” In finding grounds for 

dismissal based in part on immoral conduct, however, the whole of his actions, which 

included other instances of misconduct were taken into consideration: “all of the 

incidents taken in the aggregate serve as a substantial basis for the trail court’s 

determination that the charges of “immoral conduct” and “evident unfitness for 

service” were true and constituted cause for dismissal.” (

. at pp. 974-975.) 

In 

(1969) 1 Cal. 3d 214, The California 

Supreme Court considered the possibility that, without further explanation, the term 

“immoral conduct” may be too vague to give teachers fair notice of prohibited 

conduct. The 

court set out factors to be considered in determining what 

constitutes immoral conduct for purposes of deciding whether sufficient grounds exist 

to warrant dismissal. The 

 court noted the factors protect teachers from being 

disciplined “merely because they made a reasonable, good faith, professional 

judgment in the course of their employment with which higher authorities later 

disagreed.” (

. at 233.) Though later codified as regulations and augmented by later 

caselaw (see Cal. Code of Regs, title 5 (Reg. or Regulation), § 80302 and 

 (2010) 184 Cal.App.4th 462), the 

factors are commonly referred to as the Morrison Factors. The applicable Morrison 

Factors here are: (i) the likelihood the conduct adversely effected students, fellow 

teachers or the educational community; (ii) proximity or remoteness in time of the 

conduct; (iii) the type of credential held by the person involved; (iv) extenuating or 

aggravating circumstances; (v) praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives 

5

resulting in the conduct; (vi) the likelihood of the recurrence of the questioned 

conduct; (vii) the extent to which disciplinary action may inflict an adverse impact or 

chilling effect on the constitutional rights of the person involved, or other certified 

persons; and (viii) the publicity or notoriety given to the conduct. 

A full application of the Morrison Factors requires a factual analysis of the 

surrounding circumstances as developed through the hearing process, something not 

possible by simply reviewing the charges and accepting their truth for purposes of 

deciding the motion. The limited review possible does establish, however, there are 

sufficient criteria under the factors to support a strong likelihood of immoral conduct. 

To wit, Respondent interfered with her students in clearly adverse ways, particularly by 

blocking a student’s airways, using insulting and sexualized language, and threatening 

corporal punishment. Some of her conduct occurred and was reported to others within 

the school community, which can reasonably be inferred to cause a level of adverse 

impact and notoriety beyond the subject student. While a fuller picture of the facts 

and circumstances may tip the balance in the other direction, the information available 

here supports a finding that Respondent engaged in immoral conduct.

A teacher may be placed on an immediate unpaid suspension where she is 

charged with willful refusal. (Ed. Code, § 44939 subd. (b).) Willful refusal is properly 

plead in the SOC based upon the alleged misconduct. Respondent’s regular 

assignments include adherence to the directives issued by her administrators. The 

California Supreme Court has ruled that the refusal of a teacher to accept assignments, 

which the school authorities have the power to make, constitutes a violation of school 

laws and grounds for dismissal and placement on unpaid suspension. (

Respondent’s willful refusal to abide by the directives given to her about avoiding 

(1963) 41 Cal. 2d 546, 551-52.) Here, 

6

“hands-on” student discipline is straightforward and yet, according to the allegations 

in the SOC, she failed to comply. Accordingly, the willful refusal charge is a further 

basis to suspend Respondent without pay pending the disciplinary hearing. 

ORDER 

Respondent’s motion for immediate reversal of suspension is denied.

DATE: 

DEENA R. GHALY

Administrative Law Judge

Office of Administrative Hearings

7

