BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

Suspension of: 

THOMAS CONNER, a Permanent Certificated Employee, 

Moving Party 

and 

COLTON JOINT UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, 

Responding Party 

OAH Case No. 2022110644 

ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 

SUSPENSION 

On December 16, 2022, Matthew S. Block, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ), Office 

of Administrative Hearings (OAH), State of California, heard this matter telephonically 

from Sacramento, California. 

Carlos R. Perez, Attorney at Law, represented Thomas Conner (Mr. Conner). 

Beverly A. Ozowara, Attorney at Law, Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Ruud & Romo, 

represented Colton Joint Unified School District (District).

Argument was heard, the record closed, and the matter submitted for decision 

on December 16, 2022.

Procedural History

Mr. Conner has been a high school guidance counselor with the District since 

2004. On October 24, 2022, the District served Mr. Conner with a Notice of Intent to 

Immediately Suspend Without Pay and Dismiss (Notice). The Notice was based on a 

Statement of Charges, dated September 29, 2022, and alleged cause to dismiss based 

on unprofessional conduct (Ed. Code, § 44932, subd. (a)(2)1); unsatisfactory 

performance (

., subd. (a)(5)); evident unfitness for service (

., subd. (a)(6)); and 

persistent violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of the state or reasonable 

regulations prescribed for the government of the public schools by the state board or 

by the governing board of the school district employing him (

., subd. (a)(8)). 

Mr. Conner timely submitted a Request for Hearing. 

The Notice also alleged cause to immediately suspend Mr. Conner without pay 

for willful failure to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, as 

prescribed by reasonable rules and regulations of the employing school district. (§ 

44939, subd. (b).) On November 22, 2022, Mr. Conner filed a Notice of Motion and 

Motion for Immediate Reversal of Suspension (Motion) pursuant to section 44939, 

1 All further statutory references are to the Education Code, unless otherwise 

specified. 

2

 
subdivision (c), alleging that the Statement of Charges does not set forth a sufficient 

basis for immediate suspension because the allegations therein do not rise to the level 

of willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause. 

Motion for Immediate Reversal of Suspension 

Section 44939 states, in relevant part, that a school district may immediately 

suspend without pay a permanent employee of the school district who has been 

charged “with immoral conduct, conviction of a felony or of any crime involving moral 

turpitude, with incompetency due to mental disability, with willful refusal to perform 

regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and 

regulations of the employing school district, or with violation of section 51530. . . .” (§ 

44939, subd. (b).)

An employee who has been placed on such suspension may file a motion for 

immediate reversal of suspension. (§ 44939, subd. (c)(1).) “Review of a motion filed 

pursuant to this section shall be limited to a determination as to whether the facts as 

alleged in the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for 

immediate suspension under this section.” (

.) 

Statement of Charges

ESSENTIAL JOB FUNCTIONS 

Mr. Conner is presently assigned as a guidance counselor at Grand Terrace High 

School. His job functions require him to, among other things: (1) attain early 

identification of students having academic difficulty; (2) meet with students and 

parents to discuss interventions and program options; (3) counsel students in the areas 

of personal, academic, and career guidance; (4) ensure placement in appropriate 

3

programs for special needs students; (5) assist site administrators with master class 

schedules and student class schedules; and (6) work cooperatively with District staff, 

support personnel, local school staff, and parents to coordinate effective learning, 

four-year school plans, and counseling techniques for students. 

ALLEGATIONS OF MISCONDUCT

The District alleges multiple instances of misconduct by Mr. Conner, occurring 

from August 2020 to August 2022. The allegations can generally be divided into two 

broad categories: failure to properly enroll students in appropriate coursework; and 

failure to follow directives from administrative staff and respond to questions from 

students and parents.

Examples of the first include Mr. Conner: (1) enrolling students in coursework 

that is inconsistent with their educational needs; (2) enrolling students in classes that 

they have already taken and passed; (3) transferring a student from one class to 

another without being asked to do so; (4) causing class sizes to exceed the maximum 

36 student limit; (5) enrolling students in advanced courses when they have yet to take 

prerequisite courses; and (6) improperly removing students from classes that they 

need to complete to graduate. Examples of the second include Mr. Conner: (1) failing 

to respond to questions from students and parents within 48 hours as directed by 

administrative staff; (2) failing to respond to parent inquiries after being directed to do 

so by administrative staff; (3) ignoring a request for assistance from a teacher of a 

student who was potentially in crisis; and (4) failing to enroll students in coursework by 

deadlines imposed by administrative staff. 

4

The District contends that immediate suspension without pay is warranted 

because Mr. Conner’s behavior constitutes a willful refusal to perform his regular job 

duties without reasonable cause. 

WILLFUL FAILURE TO PERFORM

The term “willful” carries a volitional coloration which excludes the notion of 

accidental or even negligent conduct. (

 (1963) 215 

Cal.App.2d 770, 775.) A refusal needs to be “conscious, intentional and deliberate to 

be willful.” (

(1958) 157 Cal.App.2d 252, 257.) 

“Willful” is “voluntary and intentional, but not necessarily malicious.” (Black’s Law Dict. 

(9th ed. 2009) p. 1737, col. 2.) To immediately suspend Mr. Conner without pay for 

willful refusal, the District was required to satisfy the following elements: (1) Mr. 

Conner willfully refused to perform regular assignments; (2) the willful failure to 

perform was without reasonable cause; and (3) the District deemed it necessary to 

immediately suspend Mr. Connor without pay.

A comparison of sections 44932, subdivision (a), and 44939, subdivision (b), is 

instructive. Pursuant to section 44932, subdivisions (a)(2) and (a)(5), dismissal is 

provided for unprofessional conduct and unsatisfactory performance, respectively, but 

not unpaid suspension pending the hearing. More importantly, under section 44932, 

subdivision (a)(8), while an employee’s persistent violation of a school district’s 

reasonable regulations is grounds for discipline, it is also not an authorized basis for 

unpaid suspension. Rather, unpaid suspension is more narrowly authorized for a willful 

refusal to perform regular assignments pursuant to section 44939, subdivision (b). 

This comparison indicates the cause for discipline for willful refusal to perform 

regular assignments is more akin to the traditional labor charge of insubordination, 

5

i.e., an intentional, willful, volitional refusal to perform any part of a particular regular 

assignment. Thus, a charge of willful refusal to perform a regular assignment must be 

more than unsatisfactory, unprofessional, negligent, or even persistent failure to 

perform a regular assignment. 

The parties’ written submissions and oral arguments have been considered. The 

facts alleged by the District pertaining to Mr. Conner’s failure to properly enroll 

students in appropriate coursework are voluminous, indicative of his unsatisfactory 

performance as a counselor, and may warrant his eventual dismissal if proven at 

hearing. Nonetheless, they may be attributable to mere negligence, and are therefore 

insufficient to establish a willful failure to perform. However, Mr. Conner’s repeated 

failure to respond to multiple inquiries from parents and students, and his conscious 

and deliberate failure to perform his essential job duties despite multiple 

administrative directives to do so over a two-year period rise to the level of a willful 

failure to perform his regular job duties without reasonable cause. 

In sum, the District alleged sufficient facts in the Statement of Charges that, if 

true, would constitute a willful refusal to perform regular job duties without 

reasonable cause. Thus, immediate suspension under section 44939, subdivision (b), is 

warranted, and the Motion must be denied.

// 

// 

// 

6

ORDER

The Motion for Immediate Reversal of Suspension is DENIED.

DATE: December 22, 2022

MATTHEW S. BLOCK

Administrative Law Judge

Office of Administrative Hearings

7

