BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

Suspension of: 

PAMELA FINLEY, 

Moving Party, 

and 

LYNWOOD UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, 

Responding Party. 

OAH No. 2022040897 

ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 

SUSPENSION 

Howard W. Cohen, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ), Office of Administrative 

Hearings (OAH), State of California, heard oral argument on a Motion for Immediate 

Reversal of Suspension (MIRS), filed by Pamela Finley in this matter on May 20, 2022, 

by telephonic conference.

Pamela Finley, the moving party, represented herself. Paul A. Aguilar, Attorney, 

represented the responding party, the Lynwood Unified School District (District). 

District’s Charges against Ms. Finley 

On November 1, 2021, the District served Ms. Finley with a written Notice of 

Proposed Dismissal and Statement of Charges (Statement of Charges), charging Ms. 

Finley with evident unfitness for service under Education Code section 44932, 

subdivision (a)(6), and a physical or mental condition unfitting the employee to 

instruct or associate with children under Education Code section 44932, subdivision 

(a)(7). (All further statutory references are to the Education Code.) The charges were 

based on Ms. Finley’s alleged conduct at school during the 2013-2014 and 2015-2016 

school years, and on subsequent events. 

The Statement of Charges alleges as follows: 

a. 

The District, believing her conduct showed Ms. Finley to be suffering 

from a mental illness rendering her incompetent to teach, issued her a notice of 

suspension under section 44942, on February 12, 2016. Ms. Finley appeared before the 

District’s board to refute the charges, after which the board suspended her and 

scheduled a mental health evaluation. The evaluation, by two psychiatrists and a 

psychologist, took place on February 24, 2016. The panel members unanimously 

concluded Ms. Finley was not fit to continue working as a preschool teacher. The 

District continued her suspension and placed her on mandatory sick leave effective 

April 15, 2016. 

b.

Ms. Finley demanded a hearing, under section 44942, subdivision (g). 

Accordingly, the District filed a complaint in the Superior Court of the State of 

California, County of Los Angeles, “asking the court to inquire into the charges and 

determine whether or not the charges are true, and if true, whether they constitute 

sufficient grounds for placing Finley on mandatory sick leave of absence.” (Statement 

2

of Charges, p. 3.) “The Trial Court found in favor of the District, and ruled that (1) the 

District was entitled to judgment as a matter of law; (2) that Appellant suffered from 

mental illness of such a degree as to render her incompetent to perform her duties as 

a preschool teacher; (3) that the severity of Appellant’s mental illness constituted 

sufficient grounds for placing her on mandatory sick leave of absence; and (4) the 

District’s charges against Appellant were established and constituted sufficient 

grounds for placing her on mandatory sick leave of absence. Accordingly, on May 2, 

2017, the Trial Court entered Judgment in favor of the District, finding that the charges 

against Appellant were true and that the charges constituted sufficient grounds for 

placing her on mandatory sick leave of absence.” (

.) 

c. 

Ms. Finley filed an appeal from the judgment to the Court of Appeal, 

Second Appellate District. 

d. 

Ms. Finley requested a panel to conduct a second mental health 

evaluation. Though the request was late, under section 44942, the District agreed on 

June 21, 2018, to have another panel evaluate her. The District scheduled the second 

evaluation for September 28, 2018, and asked Ms. Finley to select three panelists by 

September 4, 2018. Ms. Finley failed to do so. The District allowed Ms. Finley to remain 

on an unpaid leave of absence “as a temporary accommodation.” (Statement of 

Charges, p. 4.) From April to July 2019, the District corresponded with Ms. Finley about 

scheduling another panel. 

e. 

On August 1, 2019, the Court of Appeal affirmed the trial court’s order 

and judgment, finding that Ms. Finley “failed to proffer ‘any coherent argument, other 

than vague, unsupported references to having been denied due process.’” (Statement 

of Charges, pp. 4-5.) 

3

f. 

The District served on Ms. Finley a Notice of Intent to Dismiss, on 

October 9, 2019. At a Skelly hearing on November 6, 2019, Ms. Finley’s lawyer claimed 

that Ms. Finley was being singled out on the basis of a disability and was qualified to 

return to work. The District and Ms. Finley engaged in an interactive process, until on 

July 7, 2020, Ms. Finley wrote that she was not requesting an accommodation or 

claiming any disability and would not continue to participate in the interactive process.

g. 

The District notified Ms. Finley on July 21, 2020, that it would convene a 

new panel to conduct a second mental health examination. Ms. Finley again failed to 

select panel members. The District informed her she could not return to work with 

students until medically cleared to do so, and kept Ms. Finley on an unpaid leave of 

absence. After Ms. Finley failed to select panel members, maintaining nevertheless that 

she was fit to teach, the District selected panel members. The panel conducted a 

mental health evaluation, which Ms. Finley refused to attend, and adopted the medical 

findings of the first panel, confirming Ms. Finley remains unable to return to work. 

h. 

The District scheduled a meeting with Ms. Finley for December 17, 2020, 

to ascertain whether she would be interested in a vacant alternative position. Ms. 

Finley failed to attend. The District nevertheless identified three vacant non-teaching 

positions as possibilities for Ms. Finley and asked her to apply by December 29, 2020. 

She did not do so. 

i. 

The District ultimately filed the Notice of Dismissal and Statement of 

Charges, alleging that “no fitness for duty panel, court, or any other binding authority 

under Education Code section 44942 has concluded that Finley is competent to 

perform her assigned duties. Indeed, the multiple, above-detailed medical findings 

and court decisions establish that Finley is not medically fit to instruct or associate 

with students at the District, with or without accommodations. As such, the District is 

4

hereby proceeding with dismissal in accordance with Education Code sections 

44942(i), 44932, and 44934.” (Statement of Charges, p. 9.)

The Notice of Dismissal and Statement of Charges went to hearing before a 

panel, presided over by an OAH ALJ, from May 9 to 13 and May 16, 2022. The hearing 

concluded and the matter is under submission. No decision has yet issued. 

The MIRS 

On April 22, 2022, Ms. Finley served her MIRS on the District. She argued, under 

section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), that the Statement of Charges does not allege facts 

sufficient to support a charge that she is evidently unfit for service under Education 

Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(6), or that she has a physical or mental condition 

unfitting her to instruct or associate with children under Education Code section 

44932, subdivision (a)(7). 

Applicable Statutes 

Upon filing written charges that a permanent employee is incompetent due to 

mental disability, a school district may immediately suspend the employee. (§ 44939, 

subd. (b).)

A suspended employee may file a motion to immediately reverse the 

suspension. The employee must serve the motion on the school district and file it with 

OAH within 30 days after being served with the statement of charges, “the initial 

pleading in the matter.” (§ 44939, subd. (c)(2).) 

An ALJ’s review of the motion “shall be limited to a determination as to whether 

the facts as alleged in the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a 

basis for immediate suspension under this section.” (§ 44939, subd. (c)(1).) 

5

Discussion 

As a preliminary matter, the District argued that OAH lacks jurisdiction to 

consider the motion on its merits because (a) the motion was not timely filed and 

served, and (b) the motion is moot. 

First, Ms. Finley served the motion on April 22, 2022, five months and three 

weeks after the District served on Ms. Finley the Statement of Charges. That was over 

four months beyond the statutory 30 days from the date of service of the Statement of 

Charges. (§ 44939, subd. (c)(2).) The motion is, therefore, untimely. 

The District argues further that it did not immediately suspend Ms. Finley upon 

filing the Statement of Charges. Ms. Finley’s suspension and leave of absence were in 

effect as of April 2016, so the MIRS was served six years too late. That argument, too, 

has merit. 

In either case, whether measuring from the April 2016 suspension or the 

November 2021 service of the Statement of Charges, the MIRS was served long past 

the time limits of the statute governing the motion, section 44932, subdivision (c)(2). 

That statute precludes consideration of the motion on its merits, and on this ground 

alone the MIRS must be denied.

Second, the purpose of a MIRS is to allow the moving party to reverse a 

suspension and continue to be paid pending the resolution of the Statement of 

Charges. In this case, the hearing on the Statement of Charges (in OAH case no. 

2022010263) occurred from May 6 to 10 and on May 13, 2022. That matter was taken 

under submission and a decision has not yet issued. The fact that the underlying 

matter has been submitted should not preclude a moving party from seeking partial 

6

relief by immediately reversing the suspension until a decision issues on the Statement 

of Charges. The District’s argument on this point is not well taken. 

As for the substantive basis for the MIRS, the District argues the motion lacks 

merit. The District is correct. The issue in considering a MIRS is “whether the facts 

 in the statement of charges, 

, are sufficient to constitute a basis for 

immediate suspension under this section.” (§ 44939, subd. (c)(1), italics added.) Well-

pleaded facts must be accepted as true for purposes of this Motion. 

The Statement of Charges contains well-pleaded facts, to the effect that Ms. 

Finley has been found, by the District and by a panel of mental health professionals, to 

be evidently unfit to teach and to have a physical or mental condition unfitting the 

employee to instruct or associate with children. The Statement of Charges alleges 

those findings were upheld by the Los Angeles Superior Court, the Court of Appeal, 

and a second panel of mental health professionals. The Statement of Charges alleges 

that there have been no subsequent authoritative findings by any mental health 

professionals that Ms. Finley is now fit to teach. For purposes of this motion, those 

facts are accepted as true. (Cf. 

(1985) 39 C.al.3d 311, 318.) 

Ms. Finley’s arguments, among which are that the trial court was incorrect and 

that she has been denied due process, are beyond the scope of a MIRS, which looks 

only at the facts as alleged. Whether the alleged facts can be proven is an issue 

presumably to be resolved through a hearing on the Statement of Charges, a hearing 

that was held two to three weeks ago.

Order 

The ALJ has considered the written submissions of the parties and oral 

argument. For reasons stated above, the MIRS must be denied because it was not 

7

timely filed and served. Even if the motion had been timely filed and served, the 

District has alleged facts in the Statement of Charges which, if true, would be sufficient 

to constitute a basis for immediate suspension under section 44939, subdivision (c). 

Good cause not having been established, the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

Suspension is denied. 

It is so ordered. 

DATE: 

HOWARD W. COHEN 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings 

8

 
