BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

Unpaid Suspension of: 

DARBY MAAS, Moving Party, 

A Permanent Certificated Employee and 

ROSEVILLE JOINT UNION HIGH SCHOOL DISTRICT, 

Respondent Party. 

OAH No. 2022040643 

ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF UNPAID 

SUSPENSION 

Carmen D. Snuggs-Spraggins, Administrative Law Judge, Office of 

Administrative Hearings (OAH), State of California, heard oral argument on the Motion 

for Immediate Reversal of Suspension (Motion), filed by Darby Maas in this matter on 

May 20, 2022. 

Matthew Chevedden, Eric Lindstrom, and Katrina Gould, Attorneys at Law with 

Langenkamp, Curtis, Price, Lindstrom, & Chevedden, LLP, represented the moving 

party, Darby Maas (Employee). 

Michelle L. Cannon, Attorney at Law, with Lozano Smith, represented the 

responding party, the Roseville Joint Union High School District (District). 

District’s Charges 

On March 25, 2022, the District filed a Statement of Charges (SOC) against 

Employee and placed him on unpaid suspension pending the outcome of its action 

dismiss Employee. The basis for the suspension under Education Code section 44939 is 

the allegation that Employee engaged in immoral conduct. (The SOC also alleges the 

following grounds for dismissal under Education Code section 44932: dishonesty; 

evident unfitness for service; and persistent violation of or refusal to obey the school 

laws of the state or reasonable regulations prescribed by the State Board of Education 

or the school district.) 

The SOC alleges that Employee engaged in overly personal conversation with 

students on numerous occasions. Specifically, the SOC alleges that: in November 2021, 

Employee asked Student 1 about her relationship with her boyfriend including whether 

they were having sex; in January 2022, Employee asked Student 1 about her ex-

boyfriend, including his legal troubles; on January 7, 2022, during first period, in 

response to Student 1 stating she was having a bad day and suffering from menstrual 

cramps, Employee went into the English Book Room with Student 1, closed the door, 

stated Student 1’s “cramps shouldn’t be severe” since she is a “virgin,” and asked 

whether Student 1 was “having sex,” and whether she was pregnant. (SOC, p. 3.) The 

SOC further alleges that during that conversation, Employee told Student 1 she was 

“tall,” “smart,” and pretty,” and commented that “I am confused as to why you have 

not had sex because you’re so pretty” and/or “I’m surprised nobody has gotten into 

your pants,” or words to that effect. (

) Also on January 7, 2022, Employee is 

alleged to have: asked Student 1 about her age and referred to the fact that Student 1 

2

could sign herself out of class if she was 18; asked Student 1 to see a picture of a girl 

Student 1 was conversing with on Snap Chat; and inquired about Student 1 and 

Student 2’s sexual orientation and/or preferences and whether they would consider 

dating each other. 

The SOC further alleges that in the Fall of 2021, Employee told Student 1, who 

may have been on the waitlist for Employee’s spring 2021 journalism class, that he 

could “get her in” to the class and proceeded to email and speak with Student 1’s 

counselor to request that Student 1 be enrolled in the class; and during the 2021 

Winter Break, Employee began “following” Student 1 on Instagram, and subsequently 

admitted that he followed over 200 students on Instagram and commented and “liked 

several students” posts. (SOC, p. 2.) 

Employee is alleged to have complimented Student 1 on her appearance in 

January 2022, by stating “you look more lady-like in jeans, you should wear them more 

often,” you should model because you are beautiful,” and complimented her on her 

eyes, body, and height. (SOC, p. 3.) 

Employee is alleged to have engaged in overly personal conversation with a 

female student in 2018, as well as touching her arm and tapping her “upper butt” 

when hugging the student. (SOC, p. 4.) That female student asked to be transferred 

from Employee’s class. The student’s allegations were sustained following an 

investigation, and Employee was given directives regarding future conduct with 

students, including the complaining student. 

The Motion and Opposition 

On April 21, 2022, Employee filed the Motion. Employee contends: the charges 

in the SOC do not constitute immoral conduct; District has not met the statutory 

3

requirements of Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b); and his suspension 

should be immediately reversed. 

On May 10, District filed its opposition to the Motion in support of its 

suspension order. Employee filed his reply brief. 

The ALJ reviewed and considered the SOC, the written submissions of the 

parties, and oral argument made during the hearing. The Motion is denied as set forth 

below.

Applicable Statutes 

Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b), provides that a school district 

may immediately suspend a permanent certificated employee who has been charged 

with, among other things, immoral conduct. Education Code section 44939, 

subdivision (c)(1), allows a suspended employee to file a motion for review of the 

suspension, and review of that motion “shall be limited to a determination as to 

whether the facts as alleged in the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to 

constitute a basis for immediate suspension under this section.” 

A motion made pursuant to Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), 

like the current Motion, is analogous to a demurrer because the properly-pleaded 

facts must be accepted as true for purposes of resolving the motion. However, the ALJ 

need not accept “contentions, deductions or conclusions of fact or law.” (

 (1985) 39 Cal.3d 311, 318.) Additionally, as with a demurrer, the Motion can be 

granted if the District’s “conclusory characterization of [Employee’s] conduct as 

intentional, willful and fraudulent” is “patently insufficient.” (See e.g., 

 (1977) 73 Cal.App.3d 864, 872.) 

4

Immoral Conduct 

“’Immoral conduct” has been defined as conduct “which is hostile to the welfare 

of the general public and contrary to good morals. [It] has not been confined to sexual 

matters, but includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, 

indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; or as willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct 

showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the community, 

and as an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public welfare.” (

 (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 

811 [

].)

The SOC alleges, among other things, that Employee asked whether Student 1 

was having sex, talked about Student 1 being a virgin and his surprise that she 

abstained from sex, asked Student 1 and Student 2 about their sexual preferences and 

whether they would date each other, and made statements about how Student 1’s 

looks. Employee’s alleged conduct evidences a moral indifference to the opinions of 

others, and demonstrates an inconsiderate attitude towards good order and the public 

welfare. As defined in general, Employee’s alleged conduct with Student 1 constitutes 

immoral conduct. 

However, the determination of what constitutes immoral conduct must be 

contextual. As noted in 

(1969) 1 Cal. 3d 214, 224 

(

), “immoral conduct” is not “considered in the abstract. It must be considered 

in the context in which the Legislature considered it, as conduct which is hostile . . . to 

the welfare of the school community.” The 

 court determined a teacher’s 

actions cannot constitute immoral conduct or conduct involving moral turpitude 

unless those actions indicate his unfitness to teach. Given the Education Code’s 

additional due process protections and higher threshold to justify immediate 

5

suspension, the SOC should be required to sufficiently allege facts demonstrating a 

nexus to teaching, just as would be required for dismissal. 

In conducting this analysis, it is important to note that teachers act as role 

models for students. As noted in 

, 41 Cal.2d 546, at 552 

(overruled on other grounds in Bekiaris v. Board of Education (1972) 6 Cal.3d 575, 588, 

fn, 7.), “A teacher . . . in the public school system is regarded by the public and pupils 

in the light of an exemplar, whose words and actions are likely to be followed by the 

(students) coming under her care and protection. . . . Lessons are learned from 

example as well as from precept.” 

The 

 Court provided a list of possible factors to aid in the analysis as 

follows:

In determining whether the teacher's conduct thus indicates 

unfitness to teach the board may consider as the likelihood 

that the conduct may have adversely affected students or 

fellow teachers, the degree of such adversity anticipated, 

the proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct, the 

type of teaching certificate held by the party involved, the 

extenuating or aggravating circumstances, if any, 

surrounding the conduct, the praiseworthiness or 

blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the conduct, 

the likelihood of the recurrence of the questioned conduct, 

and the extent to which disciplinary action may inflict an 

adverse impact or chilling effect upon the constitutional 

rights of the teacher involved or other teachers. These 

6 

factors are relevant to the extent that they assist the board 

in determining a teacher's fitness to teach.

(1 Cal. 3d 214, 229-230. Emphasis added.)

The SOC’s allegations sufficiently demonstrate an unfitness to teach. Employee’s 

conduct was antithetical to his role as an example for students, was hostile to the 

welfare of the school community, and shows a disregard for the impact of his conduct 

on students and the District. 

Employee argues that his conduct does not constitute immoral conduct as 

defined by the law and “mere words are generally insufficient to constitute immoral 

conduct.” (Memo. Pts. & Auth., pp. 3-5.) However, the authorities cited by Employee in 

support of his argument are distinguishable from the facts here. 

 (

) (1994), 28 Cal.App.4th 369, a teacher was accused of telling a student that 

she was “cute” and the teacher’s favorite, and stating “’you look so cute, when you go 

to high school are you going to bring mace in case anyone tries to get you.’” (

, 

supra, 28 Cal.App.4th at p. 382.”) The teacher also dressed up like Santa Clause and 

told female students he would give them an extra raffle ticket if they sat on his alp and 

gave him a hug and kiss. (

 at p. 379.) The court found that the weight of the 

evidence supported the trial court’s conclusion that the teacher’s statements about 

sitting on his lap and giving him a kiss were unwise, but not immoral. (

 at pp. 379-

390.) In addition, the court found that the teacher’s comments that the student is cute 

and questioning if she would carry mace, without more, are insufficient to sustain a 

charge of immorality. (

at pp. 382-383.) However, the court affirmed the trial’s 

conclusion that the teacher’s conduct was immoral where the teacher told a student 

on numerous occasions that she was cute and touched her hand several times over a 

five-month period. (

at p. 383.) There, the court found that “on its own, a comment 

7

that a student is cute is insufficient to comprise immoral conduct, [but] the repeated 

and pervasive nature of [the teacher’s] conduct taken as a whole supports” the charge 

of immorality. (

.) Here, in addition to calling Student 1 cute, Employee is alleged to 

have repeatedly made comments to Student 1 regarding the status of her sex life, her 

sexual orientation, the fact that she is a virgin, his surprise that she had not had sex, 

and the possibility of Student 1 and Student 2 dating each other. The statements 

attributed to Employee are indecent, prurient, and sexual in nature. 

The other cases cited by Employee are unpersuasive and distinguishable from 

the facts of this case. 

The allegations in the SOC satisfy enough of the 

factors to further 

demonstrate an unfitness to teach. The SOC alleges activity occurring on a District 

campus, involving Employee’s repeated use of language with students that is sexual in 

nature and indecent, which may have adversely impacted the students involved. In 

addition, his alleged conduct is likely to recur and proximate in time, occurring less 

than one year ago. Moreover, there is nothing praiseworthy, instead only 

blameworthy, about Employee’s alleged conduct. 

Based on the foregoing, the facts alleged in the SOC, if true, are sufficient to 

establish a basis for Employee’s immediate suspension under Education Code section 

44939, subdivision (b), for immoral conduct.

/// 

8

Disposition

Since the District has pleaded facts which, if true, support a cause for immediate 

unpaid suspension for immoral conduct, the Motion is denied.

IT IS SO ORDERED.

DATE:

CARMEN D. SNUGGS

Administrative Law Judge

Office of Administrative Hearings

9

