BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

Suspension of: 

BRENDA CHAVEZ, Moving Party, 

v. 

RIVERSIDE UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, Responding Party. 

OAH No. 2022030008 

ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 

SUSPENSION 

Irina Tentser, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings 

(OAH), State of California, heard oral argument on this matter by telephone on March 

25, 2022.

Arthur N. Four, Attorney, Reich Adell & Cvitan, represented moving party 

Brenda Chavez (Chavez).

Christopher D. Keeler and Lisa Martin, Attorneys, Fagen Friedman & Fulfrost, 

LLP, represented Riverside Unified School District (District). 

Procedural History 

On January 25, 2022, the District served Chavez with a Statement of Charges, 

immediately suspending her without pay and providing her with notice of its intent to 

dismiss her as a permanent certificated teacher. (Ed. Code, § 44932.) (All further 

statutory references are to the Education Code, unless otherwise noted.) Chavez timely 

filed a Demand for Hearing and Notice of Defense. The hearing has not yet been 

scheduled. 

On February 24, 2022, Chavez filed a Notice of Motion and Motion for 

Immediate Reversal of Suspension (Motion) to challenge her immediate suspension 

without pay. (§ 44939, subd. (c).) Chavez contends the Statement of Charges does not 

set forth a sufficient basis for immediate unpaid suspension. Specifically, Chavez 

asserts the allegations do not rise to the level of “immoral conduct” and “willful refusal 

to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause” justifying an immediate 

unpaid suspension. (§ 44939, subd. (b).)

On March 15, 2022, the District filed an Opposition to the Motion. Chavez filed 

a Reply on March 23, 2022. Oral argument on the Motion was heard on March 25, 

2022.

Based on the reasoning set forth below, the Motion is denied because the facts 

alleged in the Statement of Charges are sufficient to support a charge of immoral 

conduct. Chavez’s immediate unpaid suspension shall, therefore, remain in effect.

Motion for Immediate Reversal of Suspension 

Section 44939, subdivision (b), allows a school district to immediately suspend a 

permanent employee without pay who has been charged with, among other things, 

2

immoral conduct and willful refusal to perform regular assignments without cause. An 

employee who has been placed on such suspension may, however, file a motion for 

immediate reversal of suspension (MIRS). (§ 44939, subd. (c)(1).) In reviewing a MIRS, 

the review “shall be limited to a determination as to whether the facts as alleged in the 

statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate 

suspension under this section.” (

.) 

STATEMENT OF CHARGES

Chavez was assigned as an Early Childhood Preschool Teacher at Sunshine Early 

Childhood Center. The District alleges multiple instances of conduct by Chavez in 2021 

and 2022 including, but not limited to: placing and physically restraining a student in a 

“ski” chair (chairs with metal arms and a flat bottom); placing two to three masks on 

students with an additional mask tied around the back of their heads to keep the 

masks in place; physically restraining students when they tried to remove their masks; 

pulling students hair back and tying masks to their hair to keep them on; and 

withholding food from students on numerous occasions if they did not use the correct 

hand gestures to request the food items. (¶¶ 1-21.) 

IMMORAL CONDUCT

“[T]he term ‘immoral conduct’ in section 44932, subdivision (a)(1) ‘stretch[es] 

over so wide a range’ of conduct that it ‘embrace[s] an unlimited area of conduct.’” 

(

quoting 

 (2020) 53 Cal.App.5th 327, 337, 

 (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 224-225.) 

The term “immoral” has been defined generally as that 

which is hostile to the welfare of the general public and 

contrary to good morals. Immorality has not been confined 

3

to sexual matters, but includes conduct inconsistent with 

rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, 

dissoluteness; or as willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct 

showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable 

members of the community, and as an inconsiderate 

attitude toward good order and the public welfare. 

 (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811, quoting 

(1951) 36 Cal.2d 734, 740 and 

 (1970) 9 Cal.App.3d 967, 972.) 

Moreover, the definition of immoral or unprofessional 

conduct must be considered in conjunction with the unique 

position of public school teachers, upon whom are imposed 

“responsibilities and limitations on freedom of action which 

do not exist in regards to other callings.” 

(

(

(2011) 

 (1971) 16 

194 Cal.App.4th 1454, 1466, quoting 

Cal.App.3d 820, 824.) “Thus, the term must be ‘considered in the context in which the 

Legislature considered it, as conduct which is hostile to the welfare of the general 

public . . . more specifically in this case, conduct which is hostile to the welfare of the 

school community.’” (

, 

, 53 Cal.App.5th at p. 337, quoting 

, 

, 1 Cal.3d at p. 224.)

Analysis – Immoral Conduct 

The allegations Chavez engaged in misconduct in her actions towards students 

could support a finding of immoral conduct if proven at hearing. 

4

The parties’ written submissions and oral argument have been considered. The 

District alleged sufficient facts in the Statement of Charges that, if true, would 

constitute a basis for immediate suspension based on immoral conduct, pursuant to 

section 44939, subdivision (b). The Motion is therefore denied on that basis. 

WILLFUL REFUSAL TO PERFORM REGULAR ASSIGNMENTS WITHOUT 

REASONABLE CAUSE

A teacher may be discharged, but not immediately suspended without pay, for 

unprofessional conduct or unsatisfactory performance. (Ed. Code, § 44932, subd. (a)(2), 

(5).) The violation of a school district’s reasonable regulations, even the repeated 

violations of those regulations, likewise subjects a teacher to discharge but not to 

unpaid suspension. (Ed. Code, § 44932, subd. (a)(8).) Immediate suspension is only 

warranted based on a “willful refusal to perform” which must be evident on the face of 

the pleadings. 

Analysis – Willful Refusal to Perform Regular Assignments 

without Reasonable Cause 

While well-pleaded facts must be accepted as true for purposes of this Motion, 

the ALJ is not required to accept “contentions, deductions or conclusion of fact and 

law.” (

 (1985) 39 Cal.3d 311, 318.) Here, the District argues that the ALJ 

should make inferences from the facts pled in the Statement of Charges that Chavez’s 

failure to follow regulations was willful. However, absent an evidentiary hearing, 

multiple plausible conclusions could potentially explain those factual allegations. 

Accordingly, whether Chavez willfully followed regulations without reasonable cause 

cannot be determined solely on District’s pleadings but requires evidence of the 

context in which the facts occurred. Therefore, the District has not met the 

5

requirements for immediate suspension based on the allegations of “willful refusal to 

perform regular assignments without reasonable cause” pursuant to section 44939, 

subdivision (b).

ORDER

The Motion for Immediate Reversal of Suspension is denied. The immediate 

suspension without pay shall remain in effect.

DATE:

IRINA TENTSER

Administrative Law Judge

Office of Administrative Hearings

6

