BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

Suspension of: 

JENNIFER RENNELS-MAGON, a Permanent Certificated 

Employee, Respondent 

OAH No. 2022040684 

ORDER GRANTING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 

SUSPENSION 

Sean Gavin, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings (OAH), 

State of California, heard this matter telephonically on May 13, 2022, from Sacramento, 

California. 

Michele S. Ancheta, Attorney at Law, represented respondent Jennifer Rennels-

Magon.

Barrett K. Green, Attorney at Law, represented the William S. Hart Union High 

School District (the District). 

The matter was argued on May 13, 2022, and submitted for decision on May 16, 

2022, to give respondent adequate time to ensure her reply brief was received by the 

OAH. 

Procedural History 

On March 9, 2022, the District’s Assistant Superintendent, Human Resources,

signed and subsequently sent to respondent a Notice of Recommendation of 

Dismissal and Statement of Charges (SOC). The SOC alleged grounds to terminate and 

immediately suspend respondent without pay under Education Code1 section 44932 

for: (1) immoral conduct including, but not limited to, egregious conduct; (2) 

dishonesty; (3) evident unfitness for service; and (4) persistent violation of, or refusal to 

obey, the school laws of the state or reasonable regulations prescribed for the 

government of the public schools by the state board or by the governing board of the 

school district employing her. (§ 44932, subd. (a)(1), (4), (6), & (8).)

On April 20, 2022, respondent filed a Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

Suspension (Motion) pursuant to section 44939, subdivision (c), in which she alleged 

the allegations and charges contained in the SOC are insufficient under section 44939, 

subdivision (b), to authorize the District to suspend her without pay pending her 

hearing before the Commission on Professional Competence. The District filed a 

written opposition to respondent’s Motion, and respondent filed a written reply to the 

opposition.

1 Statutory references are to the Education Code, unless otherwise specified. 

2

 
Facts as Alleged in the SOC2

Respondent is a high school Performing Arts/Drama teacher for the District. On 

multiple occasions in August and early September 2021, respondent’s students 

complained to her about her teaching style and decisions. The students became 

frustrated by respondent’s behavior and her subsequent unresponsive and dismissive 

attitude. As a result, on September 23, 2021, the students complained about 

respondent to their choir instructor, Ms. Anders, and asked for advice about what to 

do. Ms. Anders relayed the students’ concerns to respondent. 

In response, respondent cancelled theater rehearsal that day. Additionally, in 

her regularly scheduled class, she jeered, squinted her eyes, and yelled as she lectured 

and scolded her students. She said things such as, “I canceled rehearsal because I 

didn't want to see you for longer than I had to today”; “I just want you guys to know 

that acting too big for your britches is not an attractive quality, it's not a quality that 

makes me want to work with you again as an actor”; “I think some of you need to be 

put in your place because clearly you think way too highly of yourselves if you think 

you know better than me”; “I hope that you're sitting there feeling bad and feeling 

ashamed because you should”; and “How dare you. I'm done with you guys today.” 

She also warned the students not to share details about her conduct with Ms. Anders. 

She then left the class early. 

2 Section 44939, subdivision (c), requires the facts in the SOC to be treated as 

true for purposes of this Motion. Consequently, the statements below are not findings 

of fact, but rather summaries of the allegations as they appear in the SOC. 

3

 
Multiple students felt emotionally traumatized by respondent’s statements. One 

student reported shaking, crying, hyperventilating, and having a panic attack. Other 

students reported feeling anxious, scared, unsafe, overwhelmed, worthless, 

insignificant, angry, and confused. Students and their parents also reported wanting to 

drop respondent’s class or avoid taking her classes in the future. 

Analysis 

Section 44932, subdivision (a), lists causes for dismissal of a permanent 

employee. In contrast, section 44939, subdivision (b), lists causes for immediate 

suspension without pay of permanent employees, including, as relevant here, “immoral 

conduct.” In both the SOC and subsequent briefing and argument, the District sought 

to immediately suspend respondent without pay for “immoral conduct, including 

egregious misconduct,” under section 44932, subdivision (a)(1). The District did not 

contend cause exists to immediately suspend respondent without pay for immoral 

conduct as that term is used in section 44939, subdivision (b).

More specifically, the District contends it is authorized to immediately suspend 

respondent without pay because the Legislature recently amended section 44932 to 

permit terminations of permanent employees for “[i]mmoral conduct, including, but 

not limited to, egregious misconduct.” The term “egregious misconduct” is explicitly 

limited to sexual misconduct offenses, controlled substances offenses, and child abuse, 

neglect, willful harming, and injury offenses specified in Penal Code sections 11165.2 

to 11165.6, inclusive. (§ 44932, subd. (a)(1).) The District argues the facts in the SOC, if 

true, “reflect a degree of mental suffering, neglect, and even intentional harm that 

meets several of the definitions contained in Penal Code sections 11165.2 to 11165.6.” 

(See District’s Opposition, p. 7, lines 1-2.) This argument is rejected for two reasons. 

4

First, when the Legislature amended section 44932 to include “egregious 

misconduct” as a basis for teacher dismissals, the same Assembly Bill amended 

portions of section 44939 but did not add “egregious misconduct” as a basis for 

immediate suspensions without pay. (Assem. Bill No. 215 (2013-2014 Reg. Sess.) § 8.) 

As such, no statutory authority exists to immediately suspend respondent without pay 

based on an allegation of egregious misconduct. (

(2004) 32 Cal.4th 771, 786 [“presumably the Legislature knew how to [amend a statute] 

if it wished to do so and courts generally may not insert what the Legislature has 

omitted from a statute.”]) 

Second, respondent’s conduct consists of jeering, squinting, and yelling at 

students as she lectured and scolded them, warning them not to complain to another 

teacher, and leaving the classroom early. Even if proven at hearing, this behavior does 

not rise to the level of criminal child abuse or neglect. 

Based on a review of the SOC, and in consideration of the parties’ written 

briefing and oral arguments, the District failed to allege facts that, if true, are sufficient 

to constitute a basis for immediately suspending respondent without pay for immoral 

conduct under Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b). Respondent’s Motion is 

therefore granted.

//

// 

5

 
ORDER 

Good cause having been established, the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

Suspension is GRANTED. The District shall make respondent whole for any lost wages, 

benefits, and compensation within 14 days after service of this Order. (§ 44939, subd. 

(c)(5).) 

DATE: May 20, 2022 

SEAN GAVIN 

Administrative Law Judge

Office of Administrative Hearings

6

