BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

Suspension of: 

ALICSUN BULLICER, a Permanent Certificated Employee, 

Moving Party 

and  

OXNARD UNION HIGH SCHOOL DISTRICT, Responding Party 

OAH No. 2022060361 

ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 

SUSPENSION 

On July 8, 2022, Jessica Wall, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ), Office of 

Administrative Hearings (OAH), State of California, heard telephonic argument on the 

instant motion for immediate reversal of suspension from Sacramento, California. 

Daniel J. Kolodziej, Attorney at Law at the law firm of Trygstad, Schwab & 

Trygstad, represented movant Alicsun Bullicer (Ms. Bullicer). 

Eleanor M. Welke, Attorney at Law at the law firm of Lozano Smith, represented 

the Oxnard Union High School District (the District). 

On July 8, 2022, the hearing concluded, and the record was held open for 

submission of additional briefing. On July 13, 2022, Ms. Bullicer submitted her brief. On 

July 15, 2022, the District submitted a reply brief. The record closed and was submitted 

for decision on July 15, 2022. 

Procedural Background

On May 12, 2022, Thomas McCoy, the District’s Superintendent, signed and 

thereafter served the Final Notice of Intent to Dismiss; Placement on Immediate 

Unpaid Suspension Pending Outcome of Disciplinary Proceedings; and Statement of 

Charges (Statement of Charges) against Ms. Bullicer. The Statement of Charges alleged 

that Ms. Bullicer engaged in immoral conduct, dishonesty, evident unfitness for 

service, and persistent violation of laws and rules during the 2020–21 school year.

Ms. Bullicer filed a notice of defense and requested a hearing on the allegations. 

On June 13, 2022, Ms. Bullicer filed a Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

Suspension (Motion) with OAH, pursuant to Education Code section 44939, subdivision 

(c), alleging that the Statement of Charges does not set forth a sufficient basis for 

immediate suspension because the allegations in the Statement of Charges do not rise 

to the level of immoral conduct or willful refusal to perform regular assignments. 

The Record 

Before turning to the specific charges at issue, the court addresses Ms. Bullicer’s 

Request for Judicial Notice of five OAH orders on motions for immediate reversal of 

suspension. Ms. Bullicer’s request is granted. Official notice will be taken of these 

orders under Government Code section 11515. The District did not object, and the 

parties are aware that the orders do not set precedent in the instant matter. 

2

Analysis 

The District’s governing board may immediately suspend without pay a 

permanent certificated employee charged with immoral conduct or the willful refusal 

to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable 

rules and regulations of the employing school district. (Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (b).) 

An employee who has been suspended may file a motion for immediate reversal of 

suspension. (

, at subd. (c).) “Review of a motion filed pursuant to this section shall 

be limited to a determination as to whether the facts as alleged in the statement of 

charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension under this 

section.” (

) 

IMMORAL CONDUCT 

In describing what constitutes “immoral conduct” within the context of the 

Education Code, the court in 

 (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808 (

), said: 

The term “immoral” has been defined generally as that 

which is hostile to the welfare of the general public and 

contrary to good morals. Immorality has not been confined 

to sexual matters, but includes conduct inconsistent with 

rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, 

dissoluteness; or as wil[l]ful, flagrant, or shameless conduct 

showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable 

members of the community, and as an inconsiderate 

attitude toward good order and the public welfare.

3

(

. at p. 811, quoting 

 (1951) 36 Cal.2d 734, 740.) The 

term includes “conduct which is hostile to the welfare of the school community.” 

(

(2020) 53 Cal.App.5th 327, 337.) 

Here, the Statement of Charges alleges that Ms. Bullicer worked as a Counselor 

at Oxnard High School during the 2020–21 school year and her son (“ABC”) attended 

the school as a student. In her role, Ms. Bullicer had access to the school’s digital 

system for changing student schedules. Allegedly, Ms. Bullicer used her access to 

remove ABC from his regular classes during the third and fourth quarters of the school 

year so that he could pursue an excessive number of online courses through 

Edgenuity, an online learning system. Ms. Bullicer was not ABC’s counselor and 

removed him from the three-class minimum set for students. Students who sought to 

take fewer than three courses were required to take part in a Student Study Team 

(SST) meeting or be authorized by the principal or another administrator. Ms. Bullicer 

did not request an SST or complete an SST form. 

ABC had access to 34 Edgenuity courses during his junior year, 26 of which he 

completed at five credits per course. This was nearly twice the number of courses 

authorized for other students. The Statement of Charges further allege that 

Ms. Bullicer directly enrolled ABC in 15 of his Edgenuity courses without seeking prior 

approval from ABC’s counselor or notifying the Registrar. When the school’s assistant 

principal began investigating the issue, he froze ABC’s access to Edgenuity and 

directed Ms. Bullicer not to take any action regarding Edgenuity, including actions 

regarding ABC’s courses. Despite that directive, Ms. Bullicer allegedly contacted ABC’s 

Edgenuity teacher to unfreeze ABC’s course access. 

The parties’ written briefs and oral argument have been considered. The District 

alleged sufficient facts in the Statement of Charges that, if true, would constitute a 

4

basis for immediate suspension based upon “immoral conduct” under section 44939. 

At a minimum, the District alleged sufficient supporting facts to reasonably infer that 

Ms. Bullicer violated District policies and abused District resources for personal benefit

when she helped her son grossly inflate his academic standing. Such conduct, if 

proven, could undermine the integrity of the District’s merit-based academic system, 

damage the public’s trust in the District, and accordingly be adjudged “hostile to the 

welfare of the school community” and “contrary to good morals.” 

WILLFUL REFUSAL 

Given that conclusion, it is unnecessary to consider the claim of willful refusal to 

perform regular assignments without reasonable cause. 

ORDER 

The Motion for Immediate Reversal of Suspension is DENIED.

DATE: July 20, 2022

JESSICA WALL

Administrative Law Judge

Office of Administrative Hearings 

5

 
