BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

Suspension Filed by: 

MARTIN REID, A Permanent Certificated Employee, Moving 

Party 

and 

SHASTA UNION HIGH SCHOOL DISTRICT, Responding Party 

OAH No. 2022030452 

ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 

SUSPENSION 

Debra D. Nye-Perkins, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative 

Hearings (OAH), State of California, heard this matter telephonically on April 8, 2022.  

Matthew Chevedden, Attorney at Law, Langenkamp, Curtis, Price, Lindstrom & 

Chevedden, L.L.P., represented Martin Reid. 

Dylon C.  Marques, Attorney at Law, represented Shasta Union High School 

District (hereinafter  district

.  

PROCEDURAL HISTORY 

On February 14, 2022, the district signed a written Statement of Charges against 

Mr. Reid, charging him with immoral conduct, dishonesty, evident unfitness for service, 

persistent violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of the state or reasonable 

regulations prescribed for the government of the public schools by the State Board of 

Education or by the governing board of the school district employing him, and willful 

refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by 

reasonable rules and regulations of the employing school district based upon Mr. 

Reid s alleged failure to abide by an August 11, 2021, order of the California 

Department of Public Health (CDPH), as well as district requirements that he be fully 

vaccinated against COVID-19 or in the alternative submit to weekly COVID-19 testing. 

Based upon the foregoing charges, the district governing board immediately 

suspended Mr. Reid from his duties pursuant to Education Code section 44939 and 

gave notice to him of the suspension. 

On March 14, 2022, Mr. Reid filed a Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

Suspension with OAH, under Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c), arguing 

that the Statement of Charges does not set forth facts sufficient to support an 

allegation that Mr. Reid engaged in immoral conduct or willful refusal to perform 

regular assignments without reasonable cause as prescribed by reasonable rules and 

regulations of the employing school district, which is necessary in this case to sustain 

the suspension. OAH set the matter for oral argument and established a briefing 

schedule.  On April 8, 2022, the parties orally argued their positions. 

2 

DISCUSSION 

Mr. Reid asserts that the allegations, assuming them to be true, do not establish 

that he engaged in immoral conduct, and do not establish that he willfully refused to 

perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, particularly because Mr. Reid 

offered on October 22, 2021, one week after the deadline to submit to district 

provided testing, to undergo  spit testing,

(also known as PCR testing) which is not 

testing provided by the district through its directives, but which is allowed by the 

August 11, 2021, CDPH order. The district asserts grounds exist for the immediate 

suspension because the allegations set forth that Mr. Reid failed to abide by the 

testing requirements set by district directives based upon the August 11, 2021, CDPH 

order.   

Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b), permits a school district to 

immediately suspend a permanent employee of the school district who has been 

charged  with immoral conduct, conviction of a felony or of any crime involving moral 

turpitude, with incompetency due to mental disability, with willful refusal to perform 

regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and 

regulations of the employing school district, or with violation of [Education Code] 

Section 

Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), provides that the employee 

may file a motion for immediate reversal of suspension. OAH s 

r]eview of a motion 

filed pursuant to this section shall be limited to a determination as to whether the 

facts as alleged in the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis 

for immediate suspension under this section.  

3 

 
The ALJ has considered the written submissions of the parties and oral 

argument. Based on a review of the Statement of Charges, the district has alleged facts 

which, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension under 

Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b).

GOOD CAUSE NOT HAVING BEEN ESTABLISHED, the Motion for Immediate 

Reversal of Suspension is DENIED.

DATE: April 8, 2022

DEBRA D. NYE-PERKINS

Administrative Law Judge

Office of Administrative Hearings

4

