BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

Suspension of: 

RANDY DRAKE, Moving Party, 

A Permanent Certificated Employee, 

and 

CAMBRIAN SCHOOL DISTRICT, Responding Party. 

OAH No. 2023020923 

ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 

SUSPENSION 

On March 17, 2023, a telephonic hearing on the motion filed by Randy Drake 

for immediate reversal of suspension (Motion) was held before Erlinda G. Shrenger, 

Administrative Law Judge (ALJ), Office of Administrative Hearings, State of California. 

Clarissa Medrano Romero, of the law firm Beeson, Tayer & Bodine, APC, represented 

moving party Randy Drake (Employee). Chelsea A. Tibbs, of the law firm Dannis 

Woliver Kelley, represented responding party Cambrian School District (District). 

The District has suspended Employee without pay pending the outcome of its 

action to dismiss Employee. The grounds for the suspension under Education Code 

section 44939 are immoral conduct and willful refusal to perform regular assignments 

without reasonable cause. In the Motion, Employee seeks an order for the immediate 

reversal of his suspension. The District filed a written opposition to the Motion. 

Having considered the moving and opposing papers filed by the parties, and 

the oral argument of counsel, the undersigned ALJ hereby finds and orders as follows: 

Governing Procedure 

Education Code section 44939 authorizes the governing board of a school 

district, if it deems the action necessary, to immediately suspend a permanent 

employee from his or her duties, upon the filing of written charges with the governing 

board charging the employee with immoral conduct, conviction of a felony or any 

crime involving moral turpitude, incompetency due to mental disability, willful refusal 

to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, or violation of section 

51530 (teaching communism). 

An employee who is suspended pursuant to Education Code section 44939 may 

serve and file with the Office of Administrative Hearings a motion for immediate 

reversal of suspension. The motion shall include "a memorandum of points and 

authorities setting forth law and argument supporting the employee's contention that 

the statement of charges does not set forth a sufficient basis for immediate 

suspension." (Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(1).) Review of the motion "shall be limited to 

a determination as to whether the facts as alleged in the statement of charges, if true, 

are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension under this section." (Id.) 

2 

The review of a motion made pursuant to Education Code section 44939 is 

analogous to a demurrer, which tests the sufficiency of the allegations of a complaint. 

(Pacifica Homeowners’ Ass’n v. Wesley Palms Retirement. Community (1986) 178 

Cal.App.3d 1147, 1151.) Well-pleaded facts must be accepted as true for purposes of a 

demurrer, but “contentions, deductions or conclusions of fact or law” need not be 

accepted. (Blank v. Kirwan (1985) 39 Cal.3d 311, 318.) Facts appearing in exhibits 

attached to the complaint also will be accepted as true and, if contrary to the 

allegations in the pleading, will be given precedence. (Qualcomm, Inc. v. Certain 

Underwriters At Lloyd's, London (2008) 161 Cal.App.4th 184, 191.) Conclusory 

characterizations of conduct as intentional, willful, or fraudulent are “patently 

insufficient.” (Brousseau v. Jarrett (1997) 73 Cal.App.3d 864, 872.) 

Statement of Charges 

Employee is a permanent certificated employee of the District. He is currently 

assigned as a physical education (P.E.) teacher at Ida Price Middle School (Price). 

Employee also performs coaching duties on a regular basis. The District’s dismissal 

action against Employee arises from his alleged conduct in 2021 and 2022 as a P.E. 

teacher and boys’ volleyball coach. 

On September 17, 2021, respondent brought his students into the school gym, 

even though he had been directed not to do so because of an air conditioning leak. 

Respondent also left two P.E. classes unattended on the school’s blacktop. 

On October 6, 2021, a parent from another school district sent an email to 

Price’s principal stating that her son plays volleyball and would be in the championship 

game. The parent stated that her family and others were not excited because they 

3 

know, “Your boys[‘] Volleyball coach [respondent] has exhibited poor sportsmanship 

all season, [and] we actually call your coach a cheater.” 

On December 14, 2021, school staff reported an incident inside the school gym, 

outside of room 51, where respondent angrily spoke to another school employee 

(Employee 1) expressing his anger over decorations left in the classroom following a 

dance the previous Friday. Employee 1 provided a solution to implement later in the 

day and asked respondent why he was so hot. Respondent replied, “I am always hot,” 

referring to his emotional state. This exchange between respondent and Employee 1 

was witnessed by students and staff in the school gym. 

Also on December 14, 2021, respondent yelled across the school gym to 

another school employee (Employee 2), “M, we follow the dress policy here, don’t we? 

M, if a student forgets their clothes we give them loaners, don’t we?” Respondent’s 

comments were made in a loud voice and heard by Employee 2, Student A, who was 

not wearing a full P.E. uniform, and several other students who were in the gym. 

Student A, a female, was shaking when she next went to the girls’ locker room with 

Employee 2. Student A told Employee 2 she was not comfortable wearing loaner 

shorts because respondent previously told her “she was fat and had no business 

wearing shorts.” Student A’s mother had been unable to repair her sweatpants due to 

illness in the family. Student A was so upset she wanted to go home. 

Three other incidents occurred on December 14, 2021. The first incident 

involved respondent repeatedly stating that his student, Student B, needed to be “kept 

away from him as [respondent] was upset with him.” Another teacher took Student B 

with her students. The second incident involved respondent demeaning and 

humiliating Student C for wearing a ball cap. Other students complained they were 

embarrassed for Student C for being singled out by respondent, and they noted 

4 

respondent was also wearing a ball cap that day. The third incident involved 

respondent confronting two male students in the school gym and telling them in a 

demeaning manner how disappointed he was about how they lined up for P.E. 

During January 2022, a student transferred from respondent’s P.E. class to 

Employee 2’s P.E. class. The student’s parents had requested the transfer because 

respondent had “body shamed” their student. 

On January 18, 2022, the Price principal issued respondent a Letter of Warning 

for some of the incidents occurring on December 14, 2021. In the Letter of Warning, 

respondent was immediately directed to, among other things, refrain from yelling at or 

using sarcasm with staff or students at all times; talk to students and staff in a 

respectful manner; demonstrate professionalism in the workplace and at all school 

events; and consider engaging in outside therapy for dealing with anger. 

On January 26, 2022, respondent left the eighth-grade boys’ basketball team 

unattended in the school gym for over an hour. 

On March 1, 2022, respondent angrily yelled at Student E, who was a student in 

Employee 4’s P.E. class, because Student E snapped a mask on another student. 

Respondent’s loud yelling and humiliating statements toward Student E were 

disruptive to all classes on the school’s P.E. blacktop. 

On March 16, 2022, all P.E. classes at the school were running the mile. 

Respondent had two female students who chose to walk the mile. Respondent sat 

down on the track in front of these students and stared at them when they completed 

the last lap. The two students had to walk right up to respondent, who spoke to them 

exhibiting negative body language. Other students who witnessed the scene 

5 

commented to each other and to school employees about how bad they felt for the 

two walking female students. 

On March 17, 2022, Student F, who was a special needs student in Employee 2’s 

P.E. class, was having difficulty getting his locker to open. Student F’s clothes were in 

the boys’ locker room, and he could not dress for P.E. Respondent was asked to assist 

and when saying “no,” was very abrupt and rude to Student F and Employee 2. 

On March 22, 2022. Student G suffered “body shaming” and personal “put 

downs” by respondent. Student G’s mother sent an email expressing concerns about 

how respondent “body shamed” her son. Student G was transferred to Employee 4’s 

P.E. class. 

During the last four school years, parents and students have disproportionately 

requested not to be assigned to, or transferred out of, respondent’s P.E. classes. 

On May 15, 2022, Student I, who was enrolled in Employee 2’s class, cut in line 

to enter the boys’ locker room. Respondent angrily yelled at Student I in front of all 

the male students lining up to enter the locker room. Respondent yelled at Student I, 

“I am going to embarrass you in front of all your classmates and your parents.” 

Respondent obtained the telephone number for Student I’s parents and also sent 

them an unprofessional email. 

On May 31, 2022, respondent spoke loudly and harshly to Student J for not 

completing the required amount of jumping jacks during the P.E. warm-up. When 

Student J admitted he had not completed the required amount, respondent 

aggressively instructed him to do the jumping jacks over, while the P.E. class waited 

and watched Student J. 

6 

On June 1, 2022, in the school gym, respondent harshly directed Student K to sit 

in the corner as he was not allowed to participate in P.E. due to being late to class. As 

Student K sat near the steps to the stage, respondent approached him and was yelling 

he was not in the correct spot. After Student K moved to another location, respondent 

aggressively yelled at Student K, “You’re still not listening to me. What are you 

supposed to be doing?” 

Also on June 1, 2022, respondent screamed at Student M, “Go talk to School 

Employee 5 about dress code.” This was screamed several times by respondent at 

Student M, a female student. Student M felt embarrassed and ashamed in front of the 

class. Student M reported to the school office crying and upset. 

On June 8, 2022, at the school picnic, respondent aggressively yelled “No” to 

Employee 6, after she repeatedly asked respondent to help with a group of students. 

Respondent aggressively yelled at Employee 6 that he was just there to get his food 

and that he had a class. Several staff members and students witnessed respondent’s 

outburst and reported being very uncomfortable. 

On June 9, 2022, respondent was issued a Letter of Reprimand for the incidents 

on May 31, June 1, and June 8, 2022. 

On August 29, 2022, respondent was given a Notice of Unprofessional Conduct 

for his actions, with specific directives, including that he refrain from yelling at or using 

sarcasm with staff or students at all times; talk to students and staff in a respectful 

manner; and demonstrate professionalism in the workplace and at all school events. 

On October 28, 2022, the Price principal issued a Letter of Reprimand to 

respondent regarding his loud voice and aggressive tone when communicating with 

three students. 

7 

On November 18, 2022, Price’s principal received an email from Coach Jeff 

Argabright, Union Middle School (Union) P.E./Volleyball Coach, regarding respondent’s 

behavior at the West Valley Athletic League (WVAL) Varsity Volleyball Championship 

Match between Union and Price. As documented by this email, respondent, acting in 

his capacity as Price’s coach, repeatedly, loudly, and vehemently berated a student 

athlete on the Union team, calling him a jackass. Coach Argabright reported 

respondent “was screaming and pointing towards us. I cannot overstate how upset he 

was. I came closer to the net to see what the issue was. He was yelling, ‘number three 

you’re a jackass, coach your number 3 is a jackass, you’re a poor sport, where’s the 

sportsmanship.’” Since the game was over, Coach Argabright moved his team away 

from respondent and the crowd, and then gave out the winning medals. As he did so, 

respondent was still “going off.” 

 On November 18, 2022, Price’s principal received an email from Floyd 

Alexander, the Referee for the Volleyball Championship Match. Mr. Alexander 

confirmed that respondent was yelling at a student from the Union team, “Number 3 is 

acting like a jackass.” Respondent yelled this statement several times. Mr. Alexander 

stated, “I felt very threatened and attacked by this underserved [sic] hostility. I have 

been reffing for this league for over twenty years and I have never seen this type of 

behavior. It makes me not want to continue reffing.” 

On December 1, 2022, Price’s principal received a letter stating, “The West 

Valley Athletic League would like to inform you that we have made a decision to 

prohibit [respondent] from participating in coaching any sport within our league. This 

decision was not made lightly. His behavior has been unacceptable during the boys’ 

volleyball session. We do not wish to continue our program with his unprofessional 

conduct.” By this letter, respondent was banned from coaching in the WVAL. 

8 

Grounds for Immediate Suspension 

IMMORAL CONDUCT 

“Immoral conduct” has been defined to mean conduct that is hostile to the 

welfare of the general public and contrary to good morals. It includes conduct 

inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, and 

dissoluteness. Or it can be conduct that is willful, flagrant, or shameless, conduct 

showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the community, 

and as an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public welfare. (Board of 

Education of the San Francisco Unified School Dist. v. Weiland (1960) 179 Cal. App.2d 

808, 811.) 

WILLFUL REFUSAL TO PERFORM REGULAR ASSIGNMENTS WITHOUT 

REASONABLE CAUSE 

Education Code section 44939 provides that a school district may immediately 

suspend a permanent employee for “willful refusal to perform regular assignments 

without reasonable cause.” With respect to alleged misconduct of a public employee, 

the term “willful” carries a volitional coloration which excludes the notion of accidental 

or even negligent conduct. (Coomes v. State Personnel Bd. (1963) 215 Cal.App.2d 770, 

775.) 

ANALYSIS 

The well-pleaded facts alleged in the Statement of Charges, if true, establish 

grounds for respondent’s immediate suspension on grounds of immoral conduct and 

willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause. 

9 

As a P.E. teacher and volleyball coach, respondent bullied, body shamed, 

harassed, mistreated, been hostile, volatile, and yelled at students from Price and 

another school district. Respondent has also been hostile and rude to other school 

employees. Respondent’s behaviors continued even after he was given directives to 

correct his behaviors. As a volleyball coach, respondent was described as exhibiting 

poor sportsmanship and was banned from coaching in the WVAL in 2022 for an 

incident where he repeatedly, loudly, and vehemently berated a student from the 

opposing team by calling the student a jackass. The totality of respondent’s behavior 

supports his immediate suspension without pay on grounds of immoral conduct and 

willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause. 

EMPLOYEE’S CONTENTIONS 

Employee contends the allegations in the Statement of Charges, even if 

accepted as true, constitute, at most, unprofessional conduct, which is not a basis for 

immediate suspension under Education Code section 44939. He characterizes the 

District’s allegations as involving him making loud comments to students and staff in 

an aggressive tone. Employee’s contention is not persuasive. According to the well-

pleaded facts in the Statement of Charges, Employee engaged in an escalating pattern 

of behavior towards students and school staff that culminated in his being banned 

from coaching any sport in the WVAL. When viewed in the context of his role as a P.E. 

teacher and volleyball coach, the totality of Employee’s conduct rises to the level of 

immoral conduct to support his immediate suspension. 

Employee contends he is not subject to immediate suspension for immoral 

conduct because: (1) the conduct alleged by the District does not fall within one of the 

three categories of sexual harassment or public sexual activity, drug use or possession, 

10 

and theft of property or compensation, and (2) the conduct alleged by the District is 

not, on its face, immoral. Employee’s contentions are without merit. 

In Crawford v. Commission on Professional Competence (Crawford) (2020) 53 

Cal.App.5th 327, the Court of Appeal rejected a teacher’s argument there are only 

three fixed categories of conduct that constitute immoral conduct as a matter of law. 

The Crawford court explained the term immoral conduct must be “’considered in the 

context in which the Legislature considered it, as conduct which is hostile to the 

welfare of the general public ... more specifically in this case, conduct which is hostile 

to the welfare of the school community.’ [citations] A teacher’s conduct is therefore 

‘immoral’ under section 44932, subdivision (a)(1) when it negatively affects the school 

community in a way that demonstrates the teacher is ‘unfit to teach.’ [citations].” (Id. at 

p. 337, italics in original.) 

Further, in determining whether Employee’s alleged conduct constitutes 

immoral conduct for an immediate suspension, the ALJ must consider Employee’s 

conduct in the context of a teacher’s role in the public school system, and not merely 

whether the alleged conduct is immoral on its face, as Employee contends. “A teacher . 

. . in the public school system is regarded by the public and pupils in the light of an 

exemplar, whose words and actions are likely to be followed by the children coming 

under her care and protection.” (Board of Educ. of City of Los Angeles v. Swan (1953) 

41 Cal.2d 546, 552, citations omitted.) A teacher “is entrusted with the custody of 

children and their high preparation for useful life. His habits, his speech, his good 

name, his cleanliness, the wisdom and propriety of his unofficial utterances, his 

associations, all are involved. His ability to inspire children and to govern them, his 

power as a teacher, and the character for which he stands, are of major concern in a 

11 

teacher’s selection and retention.” (Goldsmith v. Board of Ed. of Sacramento High 

School Dist. (1924) 66 Cal.App. 157, 168.) 

Here, Employee’s alleged conduct, when viewed in the context of his role as a 

P.E. teacher and coach, sufficiently supports his immediate suspension without pay 

under Education Code section 44939. 

Employee’s contention that his unpaid suspension should be reversed because 

the District failed to provide him a pre-deprivation Skelly meeting is without merit. A 

motion under Education Code section 44939 is limited to a determination of whether 

the facts alleged in the Statement of Charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis 

for immediate suspension. Employee’s Skelly argument is outside the scope of this 

proceeding. 

Disposition 

Based on the foregoing, the facts alleged in the Statement of Charges, if true, 

are sufficient to establish a basis for Employee’s immediate suspension under 

Education Code section 44949 for immoral conduct and willful refusal to perform 

regular assignments without reasonable cause. 

The Motion is denied. 

IT IS SO ORDERED. 

DATE: 

ERLINDA G. SHRENGER 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings 

12 

Erlinda G. Shrenger (Mar 28, 2023 11:06 PDT)Erlinda G. Shrenger03/28/2023 
