BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

Suspension Filed by: 

BRAD GRIPENSTRAW, a Permanent Certificated Employee 

v. 

CHICO UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, Responding Party 

OAH No. 2023030297 

ORDER DENYING RESPONDENT’S MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE 

REVERSAL OF SUSPENSION 

Kimberly J. Belvedere, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative 

Hearings (OAH), State of California, heard oral argument telephonically on April 7, 

2023. 

Matthew Chevedden, Langenkamp, Curtis, Price, Lindstrom & Chevedden LLP 

represented respondent Brad Gripenstraw. 

Lindsay K. Moore, Kingsley Bogard, LLP, represented Chico Unified School 

District (the district). 

 
Respondent is a permanent certificated teacher with the district, and has been 

so employed since 1995. Respondent holds a single subject teaching credential in Life 

Science. Respondent’s current assignment is a science teacher at Chico High School. 

On February 16, 2023, the district served respondent with a letter indicating its 

intent to dismiss him from employment, along with the Statement of Charges alleging 

respondent should be dismissed from employment for immoral conduct, dishonesty, 

evident unfitness for service, and persistent violation of or refusal to obey the school 

laws of the state or reasonable regulations prescribed for the government of the 

public schools by the State Board of Education or by the governing board of the 

school district employing him. The Statement of Charges contained 10 paragraphs 

detailing respondent’s alleged misconduct, generally classified as verbally abusive, 

hostile, and disrespectful behavior towards supervisors and staff on multiple occasions 

and destructive behavior, vandalism, and/or tampering with property, which included 

placing a maggot-infested/decomposing rat into the classroom of the Science 

Department Head, who was also one of the individuals respondent was alleged to 

have subjected to verbal abuse. Attached to the Statement of Charges were 13 

attachments containing, among other things, the district policies referenced in the 

Statement of Charges (requiring professional conduct, indicating what constitutes 

inappropriate conduct, etc.), photos, and still shots of video surveillance. 

Education Code section 44939 states, in relevant part, that a school district may 

immediately suspend a permanent employee of the school district who has been 

charged with, among other things, immoral conduct. (Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (b).) 

The district availed itself of this provision and placed respondent on immediate 

suspension stemming from the alleged misconduct in the Statement of Charges. 

2 

On March 10, 2023, respondent filed a Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

Suspension (Motion) with OAH pursuant to Education Code section 44939, subdivision 

(c)(1), arguing, among other things, that the Statement of Charges does not set forth 

facts sufficient to support an allegation that respondent engaged in immoral conduct 

for various reasons (charges not specific, charges overbroad, charges not falling with a 

discrete type of conduct that has been found to be immoral conduct, etc.) The district 

filed an opposition contending that the Statement of Charges did contain sufficient 

factual allegations to sustain the charge of immoral conduct. 

Under Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), review of a motion for 

immediate reversal of suspension is “limited to a determination as to whether the facts 

as alleged in the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for 

immediate suspension under this section.” Thus, the issue to be resolved is whether 

the district plead sufficient facts which, if taken as true, could constitute immoral 

conduct. 

The term “immoral conduct” is not limited in scope. Indeed, “the term ‘immoral 

conduct’ in section 44932, subdivision (a)(1) ‘stretch[es] over so wide a range’ of 

conduct that it ‘embrace[s] an unlimited area of conduct.’” (Crawford v. Commission on 

Professional Competence (2020) 53 Cal.App.5th 327, 337, quoting Morrison v. State 

Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 224-225.) Further, “immoral conduct” has 

generally been defined as: 

that which is hostile to the welfare of the general public and 

contrary to good morals. Immorality has not been confined 

to sexual matters, but includes conduct inconsistent with 

rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, 

dissoluteness; or as willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct 

3 

showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable 

members of the community, and as an inconsiderate 

attitude toward good order and the public welfare. 

(Board of Education v. Weiland (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811, quoting Orloff v. Los 

Angeles Turf Club (1951) 36 Cal.2d 734, 740 and Palo Verde Unified School District of 

Riverside v. Hensey (1970) 9 Cal.App.3d 967, 972.) Moreover, the definition of immoral 

or unprofessional conduct must be considered in conjunction with the unique position 

of public school teachers, upon whom are imposed “responsibilities and limitations on 

freedom of action which do not exist in regard to other callings.” (San Diego Unified 

School Dist. v. Commission on Professional Competence (2011) 194 Cal.App.4th 1454, 

1466, quoting Board of Trustees v. Stubblefield (1971) 16 Cal.App.3d 820, 824.) “Thus, 

the term must be ‘considered in the context in which the Legislature considered it, as 

conduct which is hostile to the welfare of the general public . . . more specifically in 

this case, conduct which is hostile to the welfare of the school community.’” (Crawford, 

supra, 53 Cal.App.5th at p. 337, quoting Morrison, supra, 1 Cal.3d at p. 224.) 

The ALJ has considered the written submissions of the parties, their respective 

oral arguments, and reviewed the applicable charges. It is concluded that the district 

alleged sufficient facts when, taken as true, could be considered hostile to the welfare 

of the general public, contrary to good morals, indicative of a moral indifference to 

respectable members of the community, and hostile to the welfare of the school 

community (by way of verbally abusive, hostile, and disrespectful behavior towards 

supervisors and staff on multiple occasions and destructive behavior, vandalism, 

and/or tampering with property, etc.). Thus, the charges are sufficient to constitute a 

basis for immediate suspension under Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b), 

and respondent’s arguments are rejected. 

4 

Accordingly, respondent’s motion must be denied. 

ORDER 

Respondent’s Motion for Immediate Reversal of Suspension is denied. 

DATE: April 17, 2023

KIMBERLY J. BELVEDERE 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings 

5 

 
 
 
