BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 
Suspension of: 
FRANCESCA HALULA, Moving Party, 
A Permanent Certificated Employee, and 
SIMI VALLEY UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, Responding 
Party. 
OAH No. 2023120517 
ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 
SUSPENSION 
On January 5, 2024, Julie Cabos-Owen, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ), Office of 
Administrative Hearings (OAH), held a video conference / telephonic hearing on the 
motion filed by Francesca Halula for immediate reversal of suspension (Motion). Ilissa 
B. Gold, Attorney at Law with Reich, Adell & Cvitan, represented moving party 
Francesca Halula (Employee). Erika Anderson, Attorney at Law with Garcia Hernandez 
Sawhney LLP, represented responding party Simi Valley Unified School District 
(District). 2On October 16, 2023, the District filed a Statement of Charges (SOC) against 
Employee. On November 15, 2023, the District notified Employee it was immediately 
suspending her without pay pending the outcome of its action to dismiss her. The 
basis for the immediate suspension under Education Code section 44939 is immoral 
conduct. (The SOC also alleges the following grounds for dismissal under Education 
Code section 44932: evident unfitness for service; persistent violation of or refusal to 
obey the school laws of the state or reasonable regulations prescribed by the State 
Board of Education or the school district; and alcoholism or other drug abuse that 
makes the employee unfit to instruct or associate with children.) 
On December 14, 2023, Employee filed the Motion, seeking the immediate 
reversal of her unpaid suspension, contending that the charges in the SOC do not 
constitute immoral conduct and the District has not met the statutory requirements of 
Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b). 
On December 26, 2023, the District filed its opposition to the Motion. On 
January 2, 2024, Employee filed her Reply. 
The ALJ reviewed and considered the SOC, the written submissions of the 
parties, and the oral argument made during the hearing on the Motion. The Motion is 
denied as set forth below. 
Motion for Immediate Reversal of Suspension 
Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b), provides that a school district 
may immediately suspend a permanent certificated employee who has been charged 
with, among other things, immoral conduct. Education Code section 44939, 
subdivision (c)(1), allows a suspended employee to file a motion for review of the 
suspension, and review of that motion “shall be limited to a determination as to 3whether the facts as alleged in the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to 
constitute a basis for immediate suspension under this section.” 
A motion such as the current Motion, made pursuant to Education Code section 
44939, subdivision (c)(1), is analogous to a demurrer because the properly pleaded 
facts must be accepted as true for purposes of resolving the motion. However, the ALJ 
need not accept “contentions, deductions or conclusions of fact or law.” (
 (1985) 39 Cal.3d 311, 318.) Additionally, as with a demurrer, “conclusory 
characterization of [employee’s] conduct as intentional, willful and fraudulent” is 
“patently insufficient.” (See e.g.,  (1977) 73 Cal.App.3d 864, 872.) 
Analysis 
DEFINITION OF IMMORAL CONDUCT
“Immoral conduct” has been defined as conduct “which is hostile to the welfare 
of the general public and contrary to good morals. [It] has not been confined to sexual 
matters, but includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, 
indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; or as willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct 
showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the community, 
and as an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public welfare.” (
 (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 
811 [ ];  (1970) 9 Cal. App.3d 967, 972 
[].) The term “immoral conduct” has been used interchangeably with the term 
“moral turpitude” which in turn is sometimes used as synonymous with dishonesty or a 
high degree of unfairness. ( 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811.) 4THE SOC SUFFICIENTLY ALLEGES IMMORAL CONDUCT 
The SOC alleges that on September 11, 2023, Employee, a Special Education 
Teacher, arrived at work smelling of alcohol and seemingly disoriented. After initially 
denying she consumed alcohol, Employee eventually “admitted having a few drinks 
before coming to work.” (SOC, ¶ 6.) Employee’s blood alcohol test results were 0.084 
percent at 10:12 a.m. and 0.071 percent at 10:30 a.m. “Accordingly, [Employee’s] blood 
alcohol was at or above the legal limit to be considered intoxicated more than two 
hours after the start of her workday.” ( ., ¶ 7.) As a factor in aggravation, Employee 
had been previously issued a Letter of Reprimand on August 29, 2022, for being under 
the influence of alcohol while at work during work hours. On that date, Employee 
initially denied, but later admitted “that she was under the influence of alcohol and 
that prior to coming to school that morning, she drank half of a pint of rum.” ( ., ¶ 
11.) At 11:45 a.m., Employee’s blood alcohol was 0.168 (over twice the legal limit). 
Employee’s alleged reporting to work as a Special Education Teacher under the 
influence of alcohol, particularly after being previously reprimanded for the same 
behavior, evidences a moral indifference to the opinions of respectable members of 
the community and demonstrates an inconsiderate attitude towards good order and 
the public welfare. The totality of the allegations in the SOC, if true, establish grounds 
for Employee’s immediate suspension for immoral conduct. 
EMPLOYEE’S ARGUMENTS ARE NOT PERSUASIVE  
In her Motion and oral argument, Employee asserts that immediate suspension 
is improper because her conduct “instead can be correctly categorized as falling under 
the other . . . dismissal causes alleged against [her],” including evident unfitness for 
service and alcoholism, and that the Legislature did not intend for alcohol abuse to be 5a basis for suspension. This argument is not persuasive. Employee correctly points out 
that “alcoholism … that makes the employee unfit to instruct or associate with 
children” is separate and different from “immoral conduct.” (Motion., p. 3, lines 12-15.) 
However, she cites no statute or case law precluding conduct constituting a basis for 
dismissal under Education Code section 44932 from also being deemed immoral 
conduct for purposes of immediate suspension under Education Code section 44939. 
For example, while dishonesty may be a basis for teacher dismissal (Ed. Code, § 44932, 
subd. (a)(4)), this does not preclude dishonesty from also rising to the level of immoral 
conduct in cases involving a teacher’s theft. In fact, Employee notes in her Motion, 
“Cases sustaining charges of immoral conduct in the context of a teacher dismissal or 
credential revocation fall into three categories [including] a teacher’s theft of property 
or compensation.” ( ., p. 4, lines 4-17.) In this case, Employee’s suspension is based on 
her immoral conduct of reporting to work intoxicated. It is not based on the separate 
determinations that she may also be an alcoholic or that she is evidently unfit to teach.
In her Motion and oral argument, Employee contends that public intoxication is 
not immoral per se. Employee maintains the SOC must allege additional facts to give 
rise to immoral conduct such as actual student contact or indecent comments to 
colleagues. (Motion, p. 6, lines 2-4.) These arguments are not persuasive and ignore 
significant relevant details. Employee was not just intoxicated in “public,” but she was 
intoxicated on school grounds while reporting to work as a Special Education Teacher. 
Moreover, actual student contact or indecent behavior are not required for her 
conduct to rise to the level of immoral conduct because her mere presence on campus 
placed students on campus at risk of exposure to her “inconsiderate attitude towards 
good order and the public welfare.” 6 Morrison Factors 
For purposes of teacher discipline, the determination of what constitutes 
immoral conduct must be contextual. As noted in 
(1969) 1 Cal. 3d 214, 224 ( ), “immoral conduct” is not “considered in the 
abstract. It must be considered in the context in which the Legislature considered it, as 
conduct which is hostile . . . to the welfare of the school community.” The  
court determined a teacher’s actions cannot constitute immoral conduct or conduct 
involving moral turpitude unless those actions indicate an unfitness to teach. Given the 
Education Code’s additional due process protections and higher threshold to justify 
immediate suspension, the SOC should be required to sufficiently allege facts 
demonstrating a nexus to teaching, just as would be required for dismissal. 
In conducting this analysis, it is important to note that teachers act as role 
models for students. As noted in (1953) 41 Cal.2d 546, 552, 
“A teacher . . . in the public school system is regarded by the public and pupils in the 
light of an exemplar, whose words and actions are likely to be followed by the 
(students) coming under her care and protection. . . . Lessons are learned from 
example as well as from precept.” 
The California Supreme Court in provided a list of possible factors to 
aid in the analysis of whether a teacher’s conduct indicates an unfitness to teach, as 
follows: 
In determining whether the teacher's conduct thus indicates 
unfitness to teach the board may consider such matters as 
the likelihood that the conduct may have adversely affected 
students or fellow teachers, the degree of such adversity 7anticipated, the proximity or remoteness in time of the 
conduct, the type of teaching certificate held by the party 
involved, the extenuating or aggravating circumstances, if 
any, surrounding the conduct, the praiseworthiness or 
blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the conduct, 
the likelihood of the recurrence of the questioned conduct, 
and the extent to which disciplinary action may inflict an 
adverse impact or chilling effect upon the constitutional 
rights of the teacher involved or other teachers. These 
factors are relevant to the extent that they assist the board 
in determining a teacher's fitness to teach. 
( , 1 Cal. 3d at 229-230.)
The factors articulated in are applicable in determining the propriety 
of an immediate suspension based on immoral conduct. The  factors have 
been provided to assist in the required analysis of whether conduct has a sufficient 
nexus with teaching to warrant adverse employment action. does not require 
that any or all factors be utilized and met. For this inquiry, the factors are reviewed to 
the extent they assist in determining whether Employee’s immoral conduct, as alleged, 
indicates her unfitness to teach.
The SOC sufficiently alleges an unfitness to teach. Employee’s alleged 
intoxication at work was antithetical to her role as an exemplar for students, was 
hostile to the welfare of the school community, and shows a disregard for the possible 
impact of her conduct on students, colleagues, and the District. 8Additionally, the allegations in the SOC satisfy enough of the factors 
to further demonstrate an unfitness to teach. The SOC alleges activity occurring 
recently (in September 2023) on a District campus, involving Employee’s reporting to 
work as a certificated Special Education Teacher. Her alleged intoxication was 
purportedly known to other employees, and there was a likelihood that her apparent 
intoxication may have adversely affected students or fellow teachers. There is nothing 
praiseworthy about Employee’s reporting to work intoxicated; her alleged behavior 
was only blameworthy. Moreover, there is a high likelihood of recurrence given her 
recidivism after previously being reprimanded for reporting to work intoxicated.
Disposition
Based on the foregoing, the facts alleged in the SOC, if true, are sufficient to 
establish a basis for Employee’s immediate suspension under Education Code section 
44939, subdivision (b), for immoral conduct. The Motion is denied.
IT IS SO ORDERED.
DATE:
JULIE CABOS-OWEN
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings
