BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

Suspension of: 

NIAMH CONNER, 

Moving Party, 

and 

TWIN RIVERS UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, 

Responding Party. 

OAH No. 2023040151 

ORDER GRANTING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 

SUSPENSION 

Thomas Heller, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, 

State of California, heard this matter telephonically on April 21, 2023. 

Donald A. Velez, Esq., Haight Brown & Bonesteel LLP, represented moving party 

Niamh Conner (Conner). 

William F. Schuetz, Jr., Esq., Dannis Woliver Kelley, represented responding party 

Twin Rivers Unified School District (District). 

BACKGROUND 

On March 29, 2023, the Chief Human Resources Officer of the District filed a 

Statement of Charges recommending that the District’s Board of Trustees (Board) give 

notice to Conner of its intention to immediately suspend her without pay and 

thereafter dismiss her from employment. The Board gave the notice to Conner, who 

demanded a hearing on the dismissal and moved for immediate reversal of the 

suspension under Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1). The District filed 

an opposition to the motion to which Conner replied, and counsel for both parties 

presented oral argument at the motion hearing. 

The District’s opposition includes a declaration of counsel attaching an order 

and statement of charges from a different administrative case about a different 

teacher in another school district. Conner objects to the declaration and items from 

the other case as irrelevant and extrajudicial materials not contained in the Statement 

of Charges. Conner’s objection is sustained; the declaration and items from the other 

case are inappropriate to consider on this motion. 

Conner asserts that the facts as alleged in the Statement of Charges, even if 

true, are insufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension without pay. The 

Statement of Charges alleges Conner, a permanent certificated employee most 

recently assigned as the principal of a District elementary school, “engaged in immoral 

and unethical conduct, contrary to the District standards and California law, when she: 

[¶] a. Initiated a sexual relationship with a non-management subordinate employee 

2 

 
 
[identified as “TW”]; [¶] b. Scheduled and engaged in sexual conduct in a classroom on 

the school campus where she served as the senior administrator; [¶] c. Admitted a 

classified non-exempt employee to school property after his work shift for the sole 

purpose of sexual intercourse; [¶] d. Failed to ensure that other staff, students, or 

persons would not inadvertently witness the sexual activity on campus; [¶] e. Discussed 

the sexual relationship with other District staff; and [¶] f. Confronted TW publicly and 

on District property about their sexual relationship.” (Statement of Charges, pp. 4-5.) 

The Statement of Charges also alleges this conduct demonstrates evident unfitness for 

service and a persistent violation of or refusal to obey the rules governing Conner’s 

employment. 

According to the Statement of Charges, Conner had sex with TW in a classroom 

in the fall of 2021 on at least two separate occasions. Conner scheduled the sexual 

activity for Friday evenings after TW ended his work shift at the District, and she did 

not take precautions to ensure no one else was on campus at the time. On March 25, 

2022, during the instructional day, Conner confronted TW outside on the school 

campus because he was allegedly telling staff about their sexual relationship. 

The District asserts the allegations are sufficient to support Conner’s immediate 

suspension without pay for immoral conduct under Education Code section 44939. 

Whether the facts alleged also demonstrate evidence unfitness for service and a 

persistent violation of or refusal to obey the rules governing Conner’s employment is 

not an issue on the motion. Conner asserts the factual allegations, even if true, are 

insufficient to constitute immoral conduct indicating Conner is unfit to teach when 

assessed under the factors enumerated in Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 

1 Cal.3d 214, 229 (Morrison). The District argues the Morrison factors do not apply to 

an immediate suspension. 

3 

 
 
LEGAL STANDARDS 

The governing board of a school district may immediately suspend a permanent 

certificated employee who has been charged with ”immoral conduct, conviction of a 

felony or of any crime involving moral turpitude, with incompetency due to mental 

disability, with willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, 

as prescribed by reasonable rules and regulations of the employing school district,” or 

advocating communism. (Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (b).) A suspended employee may 

serve and file with the Office of Administrative Hearings a motion for immediate 

reversal of suspension. (Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(1).) An administrative law judge 

reviews the motion, and the review “shall be limited to a determination as to whether 

the facts as alleged in the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a 

basis for immediate suspension under this section.” (Ibid.) Although material facts 

properly pleaded must be accepted as true, the administrative law judge need not 

accept contentions, deductions, or conclusions of fact or law. (Blank v. Kirwan (1985) 

39 Cal.3d 311, 318.) 

Immoral conduct is conduct “‘hostile to the welfare of the general public and 

contrary to good morals. Immorality has not been confined to sexual matters, but 

includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, 

depravity, dissoluteness; or as wilful, flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral 

indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the community, and as an 

inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public welfare.’” (Board of Education 

of San Francisco Unified School Dist. v. Weiland (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811, 

quoting Orloff v. Los Angeles Turf Club (1951) 36 Cal.2d 734, 740.) 

4 

 
 
For purposes of teacher discipline, conduct cannot be characterized as immoral 

unless it indicates a teacher is unfit to teach. (Morrison, supra, 1 Cal.3d at p. 229.) “In 

determining whether the teacher's conduct thus indicates unfitness to teach the board 

may consider such matters as the likelihood that the conduct may have adversely 

affected students or fellow teachers, the degree of such adversity anticipated, the 

proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct, the type of teaching certificate held 

by the party involved, the extenuating or aggravating circumstances, if any, 

surrounding the conduct, the praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives 

resulting in the conduct, the likelihood of the recurrence of the questioned conduct, 

and the extent to which disciplinary action may inflict an adverse impact or chilling 

effect upon the constitutional rights of the teacher involved or other teachers.” (Id., 

footnotes omitted.) Not all of these factors need be examined, only the pertinent ones.  

(West Valley – Mission Community College Dist. v. Concepcion (1993) 16 Cal.App.4th 

1766, 1777.) 

ANALYSIS 

The properly pleaded material facts, if true, are insufficient to constitute a basis 

for immediate suspension for immoral conduct under Education Code section 44939. 

Considering the Morrison factors, Conner’s alleged conduct does not necessarily 

indicate she is unfit to teach. The Statement of Charges does not allege facts about 

any likely adverse effect of Conner’s sexual relationship with TW on students or fellow 

teachers, or the degree of adversity anticipated. While other staff learned of the 

relationship itself, there are no facts alleged about the publicity or notoriety given to 

the most serious allegations of scheduling and having sexual intercourse at the school. 

“’Various cases have emphasized the significance of the public nature of a teacher's 

5 

 
 
misconduct, or the notoriety and publicity accorded it.’ [Citation.]” (Crawford v. 

Commission on Professional Competence of Jurupa Unified School District (2020) 53 

Cal.App.5th 327, 339 (Crawford).) The Statement of Charges is silent on whether the 

most serious misconduct alleged became publicly known. Furthermore, that alleged 

misconduct was in the fall of 2021, and Conner’s continued employment until her 

suspension in March 2023 calls into question whether the charges justify that 

suspension pending a dismissal hearing. 

The District asserts the Morrison factors do not apply to an immediate 

suspension; instead, they are only relevant to the ultimate decision on dismissal. But 

the District cites no legal authority for its assertion, and without applying the Morrison 

factors, “whether conduct is ‘immoral’ becomes little more than an abstract moral 

judgment. . . .” (Crawford, supra, 53 Cal.App.5th at p. 339, citation omitted.) “Terms 

such as ‘immoral or unprofessional conduct’ or ‘moral turpitude’ stretch over so wide a 

range that they embrace an unlimited area of conduct. In using them the Legislature 

surely did not mean to endow the employing agency with the power to dismiss any 

employee whose personal, private conduct incurred its disapproval.” (Morrison, supra, 

1 Cal.3d at p. 224–225.) If an employing agency does not have that power as to a 

dismissal, it is difficult to see why an employing agency would have it as to a 

suspension. 

An immediate suspension for immoral conduct requires more than an abstract 

moral judgment. Considering the Morrison factors, the facts alleged in the Statement 

of Charges do not necessarily demonstrate Conner engaged in immoral conduct for 

purposes of teacher discipline. Therefore, Conner is entitled to immediate reversal of 

her suspension. 

6 

 
 
ORDER 

The motion for immediate reversal of suspension is granted. The District shall 

make Conner whole for any lost wages, benefits, and compensation within 14 days 

after service of this order. (Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(5).) 

DATE:  

THOMAS HELLER 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings 

7 

Thomas Heller (May 5, 2023 14:15 PDT)05/05/2023 
 
 
 
