BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

Suspension of: 

JEFFREY BRANDOW, A Permanent Certificated Employee, 

Moving Party, 

v. 

SAN LUIS COASTAL UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, 

Responding Party. 

OAH No. 2023090795 

(Related to OAH No. 2023100051) 

ORDER DENYING MOTION 

FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF SUSPENSION 

(Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(4)) 

Administrative Law Judge Juliet E. Cox, State of California, Office of 

Administrative Hearings, heard this matter on October 13, 2023, by videoconference. 

Attorney David P. Myers represented respondent and moving party Jeffrey 

Brandow. 

Attorney Daniel M. McElhinney represented the San Luis Coastal Unified School 

District. 

PROCEDURAL HISTORY 

On August 16, 2023, a representative of the San Luis Coastal Unified School 

District (District) served a statement of charges alleging cause to dismiss Jeffrey 

Brandow from employment with the District as a teacher. The charges include immoral 

conduct and willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause. 

In reliance on these charges, the District has suspended respondent from employment 

without pay. 

On September 14, 2023, respondent timely filed a motion seeking immediate 

reversal of his suspension and reinstating his salary and benefits pending resolution of 

the charges against him. Respondent argues that the District has not alleged an 

adequate basis to suspend him from employment without pay before resolution of 

these charges, because the allegations do not describe either immoral conduct or 

willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause. The District 

opposes respondent’s motion. 

APPLICABLE STATUTES 

Education Code section 44939 permits the District to suspend immediately, 

without pay, a permanent employee who the District alleges to have committed 

“immoral conduct” or “willful refusal to perform regular assignments without 

reasonable cause.” (Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (b).) Administrative review of an order for 

immediate suspension is available, “limited to a determination as to whether the facts 

2 

alleged in the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for 

immediate suspension under this section.” (Id., subd. (c)(1).) 

DISCUSSION 

The statement of charges has been considered in light of the parties’ written 

and oral arguments. The District has alleged facts that, if true, would establish immoral 

conduct and willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause. 

The District’s allegations justify respondent’s immediate suspension under Education 

Code section 44939, subdivision (b). 

ORDER 

The motion by respondent and moving party Jeffrey Brandow for immediate 

reversal of suspension and for reimbursement of pay and benefits during the period of 

suspension is denied. 

DATE: 

JULIET E. COX 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings 

3 

10/13/2023 
 
 
