BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

Suspension of: 

JENNIFER KAISER, Moving Party 

A Permanent Certificated Employee and 

Rocklin Unified School District, Responding Party. 

OAH No. 2023050765 

ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 

SUSPENSION 

On June 16, 2023, Carmen D. Snuggs-Spraggins, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ), 

Office of Administrative Hearings (OAH), State of California, heard oral argument on 

the Motion for Immediate Reversal of Suspension (Motion) filed by Jennifer Kaiser. 

Matthew Chevedden, Attorney at Law, Lagenkamp, Curtis, Price, Lindstrom & 

Chevedden LLP, represented moving party Jennifer Kaiser (Employee or Respondent). 

Michelle Cannon and Jaspreet Lochab, Attorneys at Law, Lozano Smith, 

represented responding party the Rocklin Unified School District (District). 

District Charges 

On April 20, 2023, the District filed a Statement of Charges (SOC) against 

Employee and thereafter placed her on unpaid leave pending the outcome of its 

action to dismiss her. The basis for the suspension under Education Code sections 

44932, subdivision (a)(1) and 44939 is immoral conduct. (The SOC also alleges the 

following grounds for dismissal: unprofessional conduct (Ed. Code, § 44932, subd. 

(a)(2); evident unfitness for service; (Ed. Code, § 44932, subd. (a)(6) and persistent 

violation of or refusal to obey school laws of the state or reasonable regulations 

prescribed by the State Board of Education or the school district. (Ed. Code, § 44932, 

subd. (a)(8).) 

Employee is a Special Education Teacher at Rockling High School (RHS). The 

SOC alleges that on January 24, 2020, Employee expressed anger after learning that 

her child, who attended an elementary school within the District, was sent to the office 

by their teacher. Specifically, multiple witnesses reported that Employee, while in the 

school office, said her child’s teacher need to “shut the fuck up.” (SOC, Factual 

Allegations, ¶ 1.) On February 14, 2020, the District’s Associate Superintendent of 

Human Resources (AS) spoke with Employee about the incident, reminded Employee 

that she was expected to exhibit professional behavior at all school sites, and issued a 

Conference Summary Memorandum to her summarizing their conversation. 

On a date not established by the SOC, two parents complained to the District 

about their interactions with Employee on February 18, 2022. On that date, the parents 

were protesting mask mandates and supporting students who walked out of school 

that day. The parents were holding signs in support of their protest. (SOC, ¶ 2.) The 

SOC alleges that Employee approached the parents in her car as she was leaving RHS 

and told them “You know, you both should go to the district to do this,” “You’re 

2 

wasting your time here, we don’t have any control, “We don’t make the rules, the 

District has all the power.” (Ibid.) Employee also allegedly told the parents “You look 

like two fucking idiots standing here with your signs” in “a raised voice with an 

agitated tone. You flipped them off as you drove away.” (Ibid.) On May 2, 2022, the AS 

issued a Conference Summary Memorandum to Employee after an investigation into 

the incident. Employee stated she felt the parents were bullies who were creating a 

“ruckus” and she was tired of it. (Ibid.) 

The SOC also alleges that in July 2022, when an instructional aide informed 

Employee that she was transferring to a different school site due to unprofessional 

conduct in the workplace, Employee became upset and verbally assaulted the 

instructional aide, making comments to the effect of “You are so unprofessional! You 

fucked me, and when someone fucks me, they are done! You will never work at Rocklin 

High again.” (SOC, ¶ 3.) On October 14, 2022, the AS issued a Notice of Unprofessional 

Conduct and Unsatisfactory Performance to Employee that included directives to treat 

all students, staff, and community members with respect and dignity and refrain from 

using profanity on school grounds. (Ibid.) 

On September 15, 2022, a parent filed a formal complaint against Employee 

alleging that she “overstepped her role as a teacher” because Employee sent emails to 

the parent commenting on the student missing class when a family member passed 

away, when the student attended a dentist appointment, and when the student 

attended baseball camp. Employee also sent an email to the parents regarding the 

student potentially moving schools and an email to the parents justifying placement of 

the student in a child development class. (SOC, ¶ 4.) The SOC alleges that during an 

August 20, 2022 meeting regarding the emails, Employee raised her voice and pointed 

3 

her finger at the parent as Employee left the meeting. (Ibid.) The District’s Director of 

Personnel issued a Letter of Reprimand to Employee on December 19, 2022. 

On December 14, 2022, the District received a complaint from a parent 

regarding Employee’s conduct that occurred that same date during an RHS wresting 

match. The District investigated the complaint and made the following conclusions: 

a.  [Employee] approached a group of [RHS] students 

multiple times throughout the course of the match in 

anger with [a] raised voice, and used profanity towards 

these students as specifically as: “You are a fucking 

disgrace,” You are a fucking loser!” “You shouldn’t be 

wearing Rocklin colors!” and “You shouldn’t be here.” 

b.  [Employee was] involved in an unprofessional verbal 

altercation with Mr. and Mrs. [P.], a student’s parents, 

after the conclusion of the wrestling match in which 

[Employee] screamed at and used profanity toward the 

parents. [Initials are used to protect the student’s 

confidentiality.] Additionally, [Employee] stated to the 

family that they were a “fucking disgrace.” 

c.  You had consumed alcohol prior to the event and other 

parents reported you seemed intoxicated. 

(SOC, ¶ 5.) 

On February 7, 2023, the District provided Employee with an Investigations 

Findings Letter regarding the complaint. 

4 

The Motion and the Opposition 

On May 19, 2023, Employee filed the Motion, seeking immediate reversal of 

District’s unpaid suspension order. Employee contends the charges in the SOC do 

meet the requirements of Education Code Section 44934, subdivisions (a) and (b), in 

that the charges were not filed with the Board of Education (Board) nor were they 

approved by a majority vote of the Board. Employee further contends that even if the 

charges were filed with Board and approved by majority vote, the charges do not 

constitute immoral conduct and her suspension should be immediately reversed. 

On June 6, 2023, the District filed its opposition to the Motion and the 

Declaration of Jaspreet Lochab. The District submitted a copy of the minutes of the 

Board’s April 19, 2023 regular meeting showing that a motion regarding “Public 

Employee discipline/dismissal/release pursuant to Government Code 54957” was 

passed. (Lochab Decl., Ex. A.) In addition, the District argued Employee’s conduct 

meets the definition of immoral conduct and the Motion should be denied. 

The ALJ reviewed and considered the SOC, the written submissions of the 

parties, and oral argument made during the hearing. The Motion is denied as set forth 

below. 

Applicable Statutes 

Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b), provides that a school district 

may immediately suspend a permanent certificated employee who has been charged 

with immoral conduct. Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), allows a 

suspended employee to file a motion for review of the suspension, and review of that 

motion “shall be limited to a determination as to whether the facts as alleged in the 

5 

statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate 

suspension under this section.” 

A motion made pursuant to Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), 

like the current Motion, is analogous to a demurrer because the properly-pleaded 

facts must be accepted as true for purposes of resolving the motion. However, the ALJ 

need not accept “contentions, deductions or conclusions of fact or law.” (Blank v. 

Kirwan (1985) 39 Cal.3d 311, 318.) Additionally, as with a demurrer, the Motion can be 

granted if the District’s “conclusory characterization of [Employee’s] conduct as 

intentional, willful and fraudulent” is “patently insufficient.” (See e.g., Brousseau v. 

Jarrett (1977) 73 Cal.App.3d 864, 872.) 

Because Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), limits review of a 

motion for immediate reversal of suspension to a determination of whether the facts 

as alleged in the SOC, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate 

suspension under the statute, the parties’ contentions and arguments regarding 

whether the charges against Employee were filed with or approved by a majority vote 

of the Board are not analyzed. 

Immoral Conduct 

“Immoral conduct” is to be construed according to “its common and approved 

usage having regard for the context in which the Legislature used” the term. (Palo 

Verde Unified School District of Riverside v. Hensey (Hensey) (1970) 9 Cal.App.3d 967, 

971.) “‘The term ‘immoral’ has been defined generally as that which is hostile to the 

welfare of the general public and contrary to good morals. Immorality has not been 

confined to sexual matters, but includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or 

indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; or as willful, flagrant, or 

6 

shameless conduct showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable 

members of the community, and as an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and 

the public welfare.” (Hensey, supra, 9 Cal.App.3d at 971-972; Board of Education of the 

San Francisco Unified School District v. Weiland (Weiland) (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 

811.) 

In Hensey, a junior college professor described the college’s bell system as 

sounding like “a worn out phonograph in a whorehouse,” said the words “whore and 

“whorehouses” in class numerous times during a semester, and said to Mexican-

American students so that the whole class could hear “I understand you have been to 

San Luis; I understand they have super-syphilis there, and you know that they don’t 

have drugs to cure that. Be careful when you’re there.” (Hensey, supra, 9 Cal.App. 3d at 

pp. 969-970.) The court found the statements to be vulgar and in bad taste but not 

rising to the level of immorality. (Id. at p. 974.) 

In Pickering v. Board of Education (Pickering) (1968) 391 U.S. 563, a teacher was 

dismissed after sending a letter to a local newspaper criticizing the handling by the 

Board of Education and the superintendent of schools of proposals to raise revenue 

for the schools. The Court explained that “State . . .  interests as an employer in 

regulating the speech of its employees” for purposes of orderly school administration 

must be balanced with a teacher’s interest in commenting upon matters of public 

concern. (Id. at p. 568.) The Court held that the teacher’s exercise of the right to speak 

as a citizen on issues of public importance cannot be the basis of dismissal from public 

employment. (Id. at 574.) Conversely, “[w]hen employee expression cannot be fairly 

considered as relating to any matter of political, social, or other concern to the 

community, government officials should enjoy wide latitude in managing their offices, 

without intrusive oversight by the judiciary in the name of the First Amendment.” 

7 

(Connick v. Myers (Connick) (1983) 461 U.S. 138, 146.) Therefore, if an employee is 

speaking as an employee upon matters only of personal interest, the speech is 

generally not afforded First Amendment protection. (Id. at p. 147.) 

The facts alleged in paragraphs 3 and 5 of the SOC, if true, are sufficient to 

justify Employee’s immediate suspension under Education Code 44939 for immoral 

conduct. Employee’s comments are hostile to the welfare of the students, her 

colleagues, and the general public and contrary to good morals. Employee’s 

comments show an indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the RHS 

community and the District, an inconsiderate attitude toward good order, and 

disrespect for RHS students and employees. While Employee used profanity when 

referring to her child’s teacher and speaking with the picketing parents, “overstepped” 

in sending the emails described in paragraph 4, and raised her voice, and pointed her 

finger at a parent as also described in that paragraph, Employee’s conduct, while 

perhaps unprofessional, does not constitute immoral conduct as defined by Hensley 

and Weiland. 

In Crawford v. Commission on Professional Competence (Crawford) (2020) 53 

Cal.App.5th 327, the Court of Appeal rejected a teacher’s argument there are only 

three fixed categories of conduct that constitute immoral conduct as a matter of law. 

The Crawford court explained the term immoral conduct must be “’considered in the 

context in which the Legislature considered it, as conduct which is hostile to the 

welfare of the general public . . . more specifically in this case, conduct which is hostile 

to the welfare of the school community.’ [citations] A teacher’s conduct is therefore 

‘immoral’ under section 44932, subdivision (a)(1) when it negatively affects the school 

community in a way that demonstrates the teacher is ‘unfit to teach.’ [citations].” (Id. at 

p. 337, italics in original.) 

8 

Further, in determining whether Employee’s alleged conduct constitutes 

immoral conduct for an immediate suspension, the administrative law judge must 

consider Employee’s conduct in the context of a teacher’s role in the public school 

system, and not merely whether the alleged conduct is immoral on its face. “A teacher 

. . . in the public school system is regarded by the public and pupils in the light of an 

exemplar, whose words and actions are likely to be followed by the children coming 

under her care and protection.” (Board of Educ. of City of Los Angeles v. Swan (1953) 

41 Cal.2d 546, 552, revd. on other grounds.) A teacher “is entrusted with the custody of 

children and their high preparation for useful life. His habits, his speech, his good 

name, his cleanliness, the wisdom and propriety of his unofficial utterances, his 

associations, all are involved. His ability to inspire children and to govern them, his 

power as a teacher, and the character for which he stands, are of major concern in a 

teacher’s selection and retention.” (Goldsmith v. Board of Ed. of Sacramento High 

School Dist. (1924) 66 Cal.App. 157, 168.) 

Here, Employee’s alleged conduct, when viewed in the context of her role as a 

special education teacher, sufficiently supports her suspension without pay under 

Education Code section 44939. 

In the Motion, Employee argues that her conduct constitutes constitutionally 

protected activity as she was confronting hate speech at the wrestling match and 

speaking on matters of public concern. (Motion, pp. 6-9.) 

Employee’s contentions are without merit and the authorities she cites are 

unpersuasive. The teachers’ conduct and statements in Pickering and the other line of 

cases cited by Employee do not apply to the conduct alleged in paragraphs 3 and 5. 

Nothing in the SOC suggests that Employee’s statements alleged in those paragraphs 

were made to address a public concern. Moreover, Employee’s use of profanity 

9 

towards students and levelling threats to the instructional aide run counter to the 

District’s interest in orderly school administration and managing its campus. 

Disposition 

Based on the foregoing, the facts alleged in the Statement of Charges, if true, 

are sufficient to establish a basis for Employee’s immediate suspension under 

Education Code section 44949 for immoral conduct. 

The motion is denied. 

IT IS SO ORDERED. 

DATE: 

CARMEN D. SNUGGS-SPRAGGINS 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings 

10 

06/28/2023 
 
 
