BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

Suspension of: 

LOUIS DE BARRAICUA, Moving Party 

v. 

LOS ANGELES UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, Responding Party 

OAH No. 2023100117 

ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 

SUSPENSION 

Adam L. Berg, Presiding Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative 

Hearings (OAH), State of California, heard oral argument on this matter by Zoom 

telephone/videoconference on October 20, 2023. 

Jason Wojciechowski and Adrian Butler, Bush Gotlieb ALC, represented moving 

party, Louis De Barraicua. 

Kelly Kim, Associate General Counsel, represented responding party, Los 

Angeles Unified School District. 

The matter was submitted for decision on October 20, 2023. 

On August 28, 2023, the district’s Interim Chief Human Resources Officer signed 

a Statement of Charges seeking the immediate suspension without pay and dismissal 

of Mr. De Barraicua, a permanent certificated employee. The Statement of Charges 

alleges the following causes for dismissal: immoral conduct; unprofessional conduct; 

evident unfitness for service; and persistent violation of or refusal to obey state school 

laws or regulations prescribed by the district’s governing board. (Ed. Code, §§ 44932, 

subd. (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(6) & (a)(8).)1 The district also alleges cause to immediately 

suspend Mr. De Barraicua without pay for immoral conduct and willful refusal to 

perform regular assignments without reasonable cause (willful refusal). (§ 44939, subd. 

(b).) 

On October 4, 2023, Mr. De Barraicua filed a Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

Suspension with OAH, pursuant to Section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), alleging that the 

Statement of Charges does not set forth facts sufficient to support the allegations of 

immoral conduct or willful refusal required to impose an immediate suspension. The 

district filed an opposition to the motion on October 10, 2023; Mr. De Barraicua filed a 

reply brief on October 17, 2023. On October 20, 2023, the parties presented additional 

oral arguments. 

Section 44939, subdivision (b), authorizes the district to suspend an employee 

without pay pending the outcome of the hearing based on immoral conduct and 

willful refusal. Subdivision (c)(1), allows the employee to file a motion for relief from 

the suspension and requires review of this motion to be “limited to a determination as 

1 All future statutory references are to the Education Code. 

2 

 
to whether the facts as alleged in the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to 

constitute a basis for immediate suspension under this section.” 

There is broad discretion in determining what constitutes immoral conduct in 

the context of teacher disciplinary matters. (California Teachers Association v. State of 

California (1999) 20 Cal.4th 327.) Immoral conduct has been defined by the courts as 

follows: 

[T]hat which is hostile to the welfare of the general public 

and contrary to good morals.  Immorality has not been 

confined to sexual matters, but includes conduct 

inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, 

indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; or as wilful, flagrant, or 

shameless conduct showing moral indifference to the 

opinions of respectable members of the community, and as 

an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public 

welfare. (Palo Verde etc. School Dist. v. Hensey (1970) 9 

Cal.App.3d 967, 972, citing Bd. of Education of San 

Francisco Unified School Dist. v. Weiland, 179 Cal. App 2d 

808, 811.) 

Immoral conduct alone cannot serve as a basis to terminate a teacher unless the 

conduct indicates the teacher is also unfit to teach. (Palo Verde, supra, at p. 972.) The 

definition of immoral or unprofessional conduct must be considered in conjunction 

with the unique position of public school teachers, upon whom are imposed 

“responsibilities and limitations on freedom of action which do not exist in regard to 

other callings.” (Board of Trustees v. Stubblefield (1971) 16 Cal.App.3d 820, 824.) 

3 

In Crawford v. Comm. on Professional Competence (2020) 53 Cal.App.5th 339, 

337, the court rejected Ms. Crawford’s contention that there are three fixed categories 

of conduct that constitute “immoral conduct” as a matter of law. Instead, the court 

held the term “immoral conduct” in Section 44932, “stretch[es] over so wide a range” 

of conduct that it “embrace[s] an unlimited area of conduct.” (Ibid., citing Morrison v. 

State Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 224-225.) Citing Morrison, supra, at p. 

224, the court added, the term must be “‘considered in the context in which the 

Legislature considered it, as conduct which is hostile to the welfare of the general 

public . . . more specifically in this case, conduct which is hostile to the welfare of the 

school community.’”[citations] (Crawford, at p. 337 [italics in original].) “A teacher's 

conduct is therefore “immoral” under section 44932, subdivision (a)(1), when it 

negatively affects the school community in a way that demonstrates the teacher is 

‘unfit to teach.’” (Ibid. [footnote omitted].) The court then addressed Ms. Crawford’s 

argument that the term should be given a colloquial interpretation that includes only 

conduct that would be deemed “immoral” in an everyday sense, such as criminal 

activity and using profanity or racial epithets. (Id. at p. 338.) The court wrote,  

We disagree. Immoral conduct “stretch[es] over so wide a 

range that [it] embrace[s] an unlimited area of conduct.” 

([Morrison, supra, at pp. 224-225].) Thus, “the proper criteria 

is fitness to teach” because the term “immoral conduct” is 

“so broad and vague” that it is “constitutionally infirm.” 

([citation].) (Ibid.) 

Based on a review of the Statement of Charges, it is determined that the district 

has alleged facts that, if true, are sufficient to constitute immoral conduct and/or 

willful refusal, which are causes for immediate suspension under Section 44939. 

4 

The motion for immediate reversal of suspension is denied. 

DATE: October 24, 2023

ADAM L. BERG 

Presiding Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings

5 

Adam Berg (Oct 24, 2023 10:19 PDT) 
 
 
