BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 

Suspension of: 

LAURA TRACY, 

A Permanent Certificated Employee, Moving Party, 

v. 

LOS ANGELES UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, Responding Party. 

OAH No. 2023090348 

ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 

SUSPENSION 

Irina Tentser, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings 

(OAH), State of California, heard oral argument on this matter on October 06, 2023. 

Jason Wojciechowski and Sara Yufa, Attorneys, Bush Gottlieb, represented 

moving party Laura Tracy (Tracy). 

Leslie Chi, Assistant General Counsel II, Office of General Counsel, represented 

Los Angeles Unified School District (District). 

Procedural History 

On August 23, 2023, the District served Tracy with a Statement of Charges, 

immediately suspending her without pay and providing her with notice of its intent to 

dismiss her as a permanent certificated teacher. (Ed. Code, § 44932.) (All further 

statutory references are to the Education Code, unless otherwise noted.) Tracy timely 

filed a Demand for Hearing and Notice of Defense. The hearing has not yet been 

scheduled. 

On September 14, 2023, Tracy filed a Notice of Motion and Motion for 

Immediate Reversal of Suspension (Motion) to challenge her immediate suspension 

without pay. (§ 44939, subd. (c).) Tracy contends the Statement of Charges does not 

set forth a sufficient basis for immediate unpaid suspension. Specifically, Tracy asserts 

the allegations do not rise to the level of “immoral conduct” and “willful refusal to 

perform regular assignments without reasonable cause” and therefore do not justify 

an immediate unpaid suspension. (§ 44939, subd. (b).) 

On September 26, 2023, the District filed an Opposition to the Motion. No 

Reply was filed by Tracy. Oral argument on the Motion was heard on October 6, 2023. 

Based on the reasoning set forth below, the Motion is denied because the facts 

alleged in the Statement of Charges are sufficient to support a charge of immoral 

conduct. Tracy’s immediate unpaid suspension shall, therefore, remain in effect. 

Motion for Immediate Reversal of Suspension 

Section 44939, subdivision (b), allows a school district to immediately suspend a 

permanent employee without pay who has been charged with, among other things, 

immoral conduct and willful refusal to perform regular assignments without cause. An 

2 

employee who has been placed on such suspension may, however, file a motion for 

immediate reversal of suspension (MIRS). (§ 44939, subd. (c)(1).) In reviewing a MIRS, 

the review “shall be limited to a determination as to whether the facts as alleged in the 

statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate 

suspension under this section.” (Ibid.) 

STATEMENT OF CHARGES 

Tracy was assigned as a Social Studies teacher at Sylmar Charter High School. 

The District alleges multiple instances of conduct by Tracy between August and 

December 2019 and in 2021, 2022, and 2023 including, but not limited to: calling 

students “loser[s];” writing “nigga” on the classroom whiteboard; stating “[M]exican 

and Black people are dumber and the education system is ‘messed up’ in poor 

locations”; making comments and laughing about Mexicans working in the field; 

telling students that Mexicans are farmers; telling students to join the KKK, showing 

them the website, telling them they were old enough for it, and saying they should try 

to join the KKK from home; and telling students that men with big vocabularies turned 

her on. (Statement of Charges, ¶¶ 1-28.) 

IMMORAL CONDUCT 

“[T]he term ‘immoral conduct’ in section 44932, subdivision (a)(1), ‘stretch[es] 

over so wide a range’ of conduct that it ‘embrace[s] an unlimited area of conduct.’” 

(Crawford v. Commission on Professional Competence (2020) 53 Cal.App.5th 327, 337, 

quoting Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 224-225.) 

The term “immoral” has been defined generally as that 

which is hostile to the welfare of the general public and 

contrary to good morals. Immorality has not been confined 

3 

to sexual matters, but includes conduct inconsistent with 

rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, 

dissoluteness; or as willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct 

showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable 

members of the community, and as an inconsiderate 

attitude toward good order and the public welfare. 

(Board of Education v. Weiland (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811, quoting Orloff v. Los 

Angeles Turf Club (1951) 36 Cal.2d 734, 740 and Palo Verdes Unified School District of 

Riverside v. Hensey (1970) 9 Cal.App.3d 967, 972.) 

Moreover, the definition of immoral or unprofessional 

conduct must be considered in conjunction with the unique 

position of public school teachers, upon whom are imposed 

“responsibilities and limitations on freedom of action which 

do not exist in regards to other callings.” 

(San Diego Unified School Dist. V. Commission on Professional Competence (2011) 

194 Cal.App.4th 1454, 1466, quoting Board of Trustees v. Stubblefield (1971) 16 

Cal.App.3d 820, 824.) “Thus, the term must be ‘considered in the context in which the 

Legislature considered it, as conduct which is hostile to the welfare of the general 

public . . . more specifically in this case, conduct which is hostile to the welfare of the 

school community.’” (Crawford, supra, 53 Cal.App.5th at p. 337, quoting Morrison, 

supra, 1 Cal.3d at p. 224.) 

Analysis – Immoral Conduct 

The allegations Tracy engaged in misconduct in her actions towards students 

could support a finding of immoral conduct if proven at hearing. 

4 

The parties’ written submissions and oral argument have been considered. The 

District alleged sufficient facts in the Statement of Charges that, if true, would 

constitute a basis for immediate suspension based on immoral conduct, pursuant to 

section 44939, subdivision (b). The Motion is therefore denied on that basis. 

WILLFUL REFUSAL TO PERFORM REGULAR ASSIGNMENTS WITHOUT 

REASONABLE CAUSE 

A teacher may be discharged, but not immediately suspended without pay, for 

unprofessional conduct or unsatisfactory performance. (Ed. Code, § 44932, subd. (a)(2), 

(5).) The violation of a school district’s reasonable regulations, even the repeated 

violations of those regulations, likewise subjects a teacher to discharge but not to 

unpaid suspension. (Ed. Code, § 44932, subd. (a)(8).) Immediate suspension is only 

warranted based on a “willful refusal to perform” which must be evident on the face of 

the pleadings. 

Analysis – Willful Refusal to Perform Regular Assignments 

without Reasonable Cause 

While well-pleaded facts must be accepted as true for purposes of this Motion, 

the ALJ is not required to accept “contentions, deductions or conclusion of fact and 

law.” (Blank v. Kirwan (1985) 39 Cal.3d 311, 318.) Here, the District argues that the ALJ 

should make conclusions from the facts pled in the Statement of Charges that Tracy’s 

failure to follow regulations was willful. However, absent an evidentiary hearing, 

multiple plausible inferences could potentially explain those factual allegations. 

Accordingly, whether Tracy willfully followed regulations without reasonable cause 

cannot be determined solely on District’s pleadings but requires evidence of the 

context in which the facts occurred. Therefore, the District has not met the 

5 

requirements for immediate suspension based on the allegations of “willful refusal to 

perform regular assignments without reasonable cause” pursuant to section 44939, 

subdivision (b). 

ORDER 

The Motion for Immediate Reversal of Suspension is denied. The immediate 

suspension without pay shall remain in effect. 

DATE: 

IRINA TENTSER 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings 

6 

10/09/2023 
 
 
