BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 
Suspension of: 
ANGELA BRACCO, a Permanent Certificated Employee, 
Moving Party, 
and 
YUBA COUNTY OFFICE OF EDUCATION, 
Responding Party. 
OAH No. 2024120511 
ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 
SUSPENSION 
(Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(4)) 
Administrative Law Judge Michelle Dylan, State of California, Office of 
Administrative Hearings, heard this matter on January 10, 2024, by videoconference. 
Andrea Price, Attorney at Law, represented moving party Angela Bracco. 2 Amanda Bray, Attorney at Law, represented responding party Yuba County 
Office of Education (County). 
PROCEDURAL HISTORY 
On October 8, 2024, the District issued a statement of charges against moving 
party Bracco alleging multiple causes for dismissal including immoral conduct, 
pursuant to Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(1). The notice of 
recommended disciplinary action (termination) and statement of charges was served 
upon Bracco on October 8, 2024. The County placed Bracco on immediate suspension 
without pay pursuant to Education Code section 44939, based upon the charge of 
immoral conduct. The notice of immediate suspension and intention to dismiss was 
served on Bracco on November 14, 2024. 
On December 3, 2023, Bracco filed a request for hearing and notice of defense. 
On December 11, 2024, Bracco filed a motion for immediate reversal of her suspension 
without pay, pursuant to Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1). She argues 
that the County has not alleged a sufficient basis to place her on immediate unpaid 
status because the allegations in the statement of charges do not state sufficient facts 
to constitute immoral conduct. Bracco requests an order reversing her suspension 
without pay. 
DISCUSSION 
Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b), provides, in relevant part, that a 
school district may immediately suspend a permanent employee of the school district 3involving moral turpitude, with incompetency due to mental disability, with willful 
refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by 
reasonable rules and regulations of the employing school district, or with violation of 
(Education Code) section 51530.
Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), authorizes the permanent 
employee to seek review of the order of suspension by motion to the Office of 
Administrative Hearings. This section limits the review of a motion to immediately 
leged in the 
statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate 
The written submissions of the parties and their oral argument have been 
considered. Based upon a review of the charges, the County has alleged facts which, if 
true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension under Education 
Code section 44939, subdivision (b), on the grounds of immoral conduct.
ORDER
The motion for immediate reversal of the suspension of Angela Bracco by Yuba 
County Office of Education is denied.
DATE:
MICHELLE DYLAN
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings
