BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 
Suspension of: 
GEORGE MURIEL, Moving Party, 
A Permanent Certificated Employee, 
and 
MONTEBELLO UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, 
Responding Party. 
OAH No. 2024120266 
ORDER GRANTING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 
SUSPENSION 
On January 3, 2025, Julie Cabos Owen, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ), Office of 
Administrative Hearings (OAH), held a videoconference hearing on the motion filed by 
George Muriel for immediate reversal of suspension (Motion). Carlos R. Perez, Attorney 
at Law, represented moving party, George Muriel (Employee). Marina L. Ramirez, 
Attorney at Law with Alvarez-Glasman & Colvin, represented responding party, 
Montebello Unified School District (District). 2 On November 12, 2024, the District filed a Statement of Charges (SOC) against 
Employee and immediately suspended him without pay pending the outcome of its 
action to dismiss him. The alleged legal bases for the suspension under Education 
Code section 44939 are: immoral conduct and willful refusal to perform regular 
assignments without reasonable cause as prescribed by reasonable rules and 
regulations of the employing school district. (The SOC also alleges the following 
grounds for dismissal under Education Code section 44932: dishonesty; evident 
unfitness for service; and persistent violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of 
the state or reasonable regulations prescribed by the State Board of Education or the 
school district.) 
Unlike its other alleged causes for dismissal and suspension, the SOC does not 
specify what alleged conduct constitutes “willful refusal to perform regular 
assignments without reasonable cause.” The SOC contains only one reference to this 
legal cause for suspension. In the second paragraph of its Notice, the SOC states: 
PLEASE TAKE FURTHER NOTICE that the District has 
charged [Employee] with "immoral conduct" and "willful 
refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable 
cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and regulations of 
the employing school district," among other things, and 
that [Employee] will therefore remain on a suspension 
without pay pursuant to Education Code section 44939.
(SOC, p. 1.) 
In the paragraph following the Notice, the SOC specifies, “This Statement of 
Charges is based upon the following causes,” and it lists immoral conduct, dishonesty, 3 evident unfitness for service, and persistent violation of or refusal to obey the school 
laws. “Willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause” is not 
among the listed causes. 
On December 7, 2024, Employee filed the Motion seeking the immediate 
reversal of his unpaid suspension. Employee contends the charges in the SOC do not 
constitute immoral conduct and the District failed to meet the statutory requirements 
of Education Code section 44939. Employee does not address “willful refusal to 
perform regular assignments without reasonable cause” in his Motion. 
On December 23, 2024, the District filed its opposition to the Motion. The 
District maintains that both immoral conduct and “willful refusal to perform regular 
assignments without reasonable cause” are sufficiently pled to establish cause for 
immediate suspension. 
On December 27, 2024, Employee filed his Reply. He maintains the District has 
not charged him with “willful refusal to perform regular assignments without 
reasonable cause.” Employee further maintains, even if “willful refusal to perform 
regular assignments without reasonable cause” were part of the charges, the conduct 
alleged in the SOC does not constitute a willful refusal by Employee to perform regular 
assignments, and therefore, the District has failed to satisfy Education Code section 
44939. 
The ALJ reviewed and considered the SOC, the parties’ written submissions, and 
the oral argument made during the hearing on the Motion. The Motion is granted as 
set forth below. 4 Motions for Immediate Reversal of Suspension 
Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b), provides that a school district 
may immediately suspend a permanent certificated employee who has been charged 
with, among other things, immoral conduct or willful refusal to perform regular 
assignments without reasonable cause as prescribed by reasonable rules and 
regulations of the State Board of Education or the employing school district. Education 
Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), allows a suspended employee to file a motion 
for review of the suspension, and review of that motion “shall be limited to a 
determination as to whether the facts as alleged in the statement of charges, if true, 
are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension under this section.” 
A motion such as the current Motion, made pursuant to Education Code section 
44939, subdivision (c)(1), is analogous to a demurrer because the properly pleaded 
facts must be accepted as true for purposes of resolving the motion. However, the ALJ 
need not accept “contentions, deductions or conclusions of fact or law.” (
 (1985) 39 Cal.3d 311, 318.) Additionally, as with a demurrer, the Motion can be 
granted if the District’s “conclusory characterization of [Employee’s] conduct as 
intentional, willful and fraudulent” is “patently insufficient.” (See e.g., 
 (1977) 73 Cal.App.3d 864, 872.) 
Willful Refusal to Perform Regular Assignments without Reasonable 
Cause 
In analyzing whether cause exists for Employee’s immediate suspension under 
Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b), for “willful refusal to perform regular 
assignments without reasonable cause,” a comparison to Education Code section 
44932, subdivision (a), is informative. Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(8) 5 (persistent violation of, of or refusal to obey, school laws or the district’s reasonable 
regulations), authorizes a teacher’s dismissal, but not immediate unpaid suspension. 
Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b), allows immediate suspension only if 
the refusal to perform regular assignments was “willful.” The statute’s use of the words 
“willful refusal” rather than “persistent violation” indicates that, although repeated 
performance failures may establish grounds for dismissing a teacher under Education 
Code section 44932, such continuing failures are not grounds for immediate 
suspension under Education Code section 44939. 
The Education Code, in creating the separate grounds and procedures for 
dismissal versus immediate suspension, contemplates a distinction between two types 
of cases. In narrowing the substantive grounds for immediate suspension and creating 
additional due process protections for the employee, Education Code section 44939, 
subdivision (b), requires a higher threshold to justify immediate suspension than the 
threshold for dismissal set forth in Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a). 
To establish grounds for immediate suspension under Education Code section 
44939, Employee’s refusal to perform his regular assignment must have been “willful.” 
In the context of a public employee’s insubordination or “willful” misconduct, the term 
insubordination “carries a volitional coloration which excludes the notion of accidental 
or even negligent conduct. . . [and] insubordination, equally with willful misconduct, 
requires proof of intent or willfulness. The latter elements imply that the person knows 
what he is doing and intends to do what he is doing.” ( . 
(1963) 215 Cal. App. 2d 770, 775.) Consequently, a willful refusal to perform a regular 
assignment must be more than an unsatisfactory, unprofessional, negligent, or even 
persistent failure to perform a regular assignment. Instead, it must be an intentional, 
volitional refusal to perform any part of a regular assignment. 6 The SOC contains headings for four causes for dismissal and suspension 
(immoral conduct, dishonesty, evident unfitness, and persistent violation) under which 
the SOC alleges specific facts. The SOC does not have a separate heading for “willful 
refusal to perform regular assignments,” and it does not specify the conduct 
constituting “willful refusal to perform regular assignments.” The SOC contains only 
one legal citation to this cause for suspension in the second paragraph of its Notice. 
This single legal citation and the lack of clarity regarding what conduct constitutes 
Employee’s “willful refusal to perform regular assignments” provided meager notice to 
Employee and reduced the analysis of the sufficiency of the pleading to conjecture.
At the Motion hearing, District counsel cited conduct alleged in the SOC that 
purportedly constitutes Employee’s “willful refusal.” (SOC, pp. 13-17, paras. 24 and 26 
to 34.) The SOC alleges, for example, beginning February 29, 2024, the District placed 
Employee on paid administrative leave during which he was required to be available 
by telephone during his normal work hours. He was relieved of all job duties and 
advised not to come to any District facility without first obtaining permission from the 
Director of Certificated Human Resources. Thereafter, the District initiated an 
independent investigation into Employee’s conduct. However, on April 24, 2024, 
Employee informed District staff he was refusing to meet with the District's 
independent investigator, and he did not meet with the investigator. The SOC also 
alleges, on August 1, 2024, the District informed Employee he remained on paid 
administrative leave. Nonetheless, on August 8, 2024, Employee “showed up to the 
‘Welcome Session’ at ELAC and breakout session for counselors at Eastmont 
Intermediate School.” (SOC, p. 17, para.33.) Additionally, on August 9, 2024, Employee 
“arrived at [Bell Gardens Intermediate School] and attended an employee meeting 
regarding the new school year.” (SOC, p.17, para 34.) 7 Even assuming the SOC meets minimal notice requirements, the SOC does not 
sufficiently plead Employee’s willful refusal to perform regular assignments without 
reasonable cause. The SOC does not sufficiently allege that the meeting with the 
independent investigator was part of Employee’s regular assignment such that his 
refusal to attend amounts to a “willful refusal to perform a regular assignment without 
reasonable cause.” Additionally, the SOC does not sufficiently plead that Employee’s 
attendance at the Welcome Session or the employee meeting constitutes a refusal to 
perform regular assignments without reasonable cause. 
Based on the foregoing, the facts alleged in the SOC, if true, are insufficient to 
establish a basis for Employee’s immediate suspension under Education Code section 
44939, subdivision (b), for willful refusal to perform regular assignments. 
Immoral Conduct 
“Immoral conduct” has been defined as conduct “which is hostile to the welfare 
of the general public and contrary to good morals. [It] has not been confined to sexual 
matters, but includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, 
indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; or as willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct 
showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the community, 
and as an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public welfare.” (
 (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 
811 [ ];  (1970) 9 Cal. App.3d 967, 972 
[].) The term “immoral conduct” has been used interchangeably with the term 
“moral turpitude” which in turn is sometimes used as synonymous with dishonesty or a 
high degree of unfairness. ( 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811.) 8 The SOC alleges, among other things, that Employee used information obtained 
from Student #2 (approximately age 12) to reveal to Student #1 (age 11) that Student 
#1 was adopted. The SOC further alleges Employee researched “District databases with 
the information he had learned from Student #2, then contacted the biological parents 
of Student #1 and Student #2 before introducing them to one another. . . . [Employee] 
chose to omit Student #1's adoptive parents, who hold all legal and educational rights 
of Student #1, of his findings and intent to introduce the students to each other and 
their biological parents.” (SOC, p. 18, para 3.) The SOC also alleges, Employee “entered 
to District premises on August 8 and 9, 2024 knowing he remained on paid 
administrative leave and intentionally returned without any permission to work with 
any students or employees.” (SOC, p. 19, para. 9.) 
Employee’s alleged conduct, while inappropriate and inconsiderate, does not 
constitute conduct “indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; or as 
willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral indifference to the opinions of 
respectable members of the community, and as an inconsiderate attitude toward good 
order and the public welfare.” Thus, Employee’s alleged misconduct, as pleaded in the 
SOC, does not fall within the general definition of immoral conduct. 
If Employee’s misconduct did fall within the general definition of immoral 
conduct, further contextual analysis would be required. As noted in 
(1969) 1 Cal. 3d 214, 224 ( ), “immoral conduct” is not 
“considered in the abstract. It must be considered in the context in which the 
Legislature considered it, as conduct which is hostile . . . to the welfare of the school 
community.” The  court determined a teacher’s actions cannot constitute 
immoral conduct or conduct involving moral turpitude unless those actions indicate 
his unfitness to teach. The  court provided a list of possible factors to aid in 9 the analysis of whether conduct has a sufficient nexus with teaching to warrant 
adverse employment action. does not require that any or all factors be 
utilized and met. In this case, since Employee’s alleged misconduct does not fall within 
the general definition of immoral conduct, the factors need not be 
addressed.
Based on the foregoing, the facts alleged in the SOC, if true, are insufficient to 
establish a basis for Employee’s immediate suspension under Education Code section 
44939, subdivision (b), for immoral conduct.
Disposition
Since the District has failed to plead facts which, if true, support a cause for 
immediate unpaid suspension for immoral conduct or for willful refusal to perform 
regular assignments without reasonable cause, the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 
Suspension is GRANTED.
The School District shall make the employee whole for any lost wages, benefits, 
and compensation within 14 days after service of this Order. (Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. 
(c)(5).)
IT IS SO ORDERED.
DATE:
JULIE CABOS OWEN
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings
