BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 
Suspension Filed by: 
FABIAN LUNA, Moving Party, 
v. 
HUNTINGTON BEACH UNION HIGH SCHOOL DISTRICT, 
Responding Party. 
OAH No. 2024100053 
ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 
SUSPENSION 
(Ed. Code, ยง 44939, subd. (c)(4)) 
Administrative Law Judge Karen Reichmann, State of California, Office of 
Administrative Hearings, heard this matter on October 18, 2024, by videoconference. 
Attorney Arthur Four represented Fabian Luna, the moving party. 
Attorney Lauren Ruvalcaba represented the Huntington Beach Union High 
School District (District). 2 Procedural History 
A statement of charges was filed and served against Fabian Luna, pursuant to 
Education Code section 44932, alleging several causes for dismissal, including immoral 
conduct. The District placed Luna on immediate suspension without pay, pursuant to 
Education Code section 44939, based upon the allegations of immoral conduct. 
Luna filed a timely motion for immediate reversal of his suspension without pay, 
pursuant to Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1). He argues that the 
District has not alleged a sufficient basis to place him on immediate unpaid status 
because the factual allegations in the statement of charges do not establish that he 
engaged in immoral conduct. The District opposes the motion. 
Discussion 
Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b), provides that a school district 
may immediately suspend a permanent certificated employee who has been charged 
turpitude, with incompetency due to mental disability, with willful refusal to perform 
regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and 
 
rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; or as willful, 
flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral indifference to the opinions of 
 (1960) 197 
Cal.App.2d 808, 811.) 3motion filed pursuant to this section shall be limited to a determination as to whether 
the facts as alleged in the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a 
bas
Luna was employed as a high school economics teacher. The statement of 
charges alleges that during the 2021-2022 and 2022-2023 school years, Luna engaged 
in inappropriate and harassing behavior towards female students, including staring at 
their bodies, commenting on their appearance, telling them they needed to spend 
and allowing them to flirt with 
him. The District alleges that these actions constitute immoral conduct.
The written submissions and oral argument of the parties have been considered. 
Based upon a review of the statement of charges, the District has alleged facts 
sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension under Education Code section 
44939, subdivision (b), on the grounds of immoral conduct.
ORDER
motion for immediate reversal of suspension is denied. The 
Fabian Luna is upheld.
DATE:
KAREN REICHMANN
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings
