BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 
Suspension of: 
OZELIA HARRIS, Moving Party, 
A Permanent Certificated Employee, and 
POMONA UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, Responding Party. 
OAH No. 2024090475 
ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 
SUSPENSION 
Taylor Steinbacher, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ), Office of Administrative 
Hearings, State of California, held a hearing by videoconference on the motion filed by 
Ozelia Harris for immediate reversal of suspension (Motion) on October 11, 2024. 
Justin M. Crane, The Meyers Law Group, A.P.C., represented the moving party 
Ozelia Harris (Harris).
Matthew Vance and Zuzanna Tkaczow, Fagen Friedman & Fulfrost, LLP, 
represented the responding party Pomona Unified School District (District).2 Background
The District assigned Harris to work as a kindergarten teacher. On August 14, 
2024, the District filed an Amended Statement of Charges (SOC) against Harris and 
issued her a Notice of Intent to Immediately Suspend Without Pay and Dismiss. Briefly, 
the SOC alleges that: 
(1) in August and September 2020, Harris failed to effectively use her virtual 
classroom for instruction and virtual communication tools to communicate with 
District employees and parents during the COVID-19 pandemic, did not attend 
mandatory training, and refused to participate in a meeting with her school’s 
principal by video and later removed the principal from the virtual classroom 
twice when the principal attempted to observe Harris’s class (SOC, ¶ 2); 
(2) on August 10, 2020, Harris sent an email containing confidential student 
information to the parent of an unrelated student (SOC, ¶ 3); 
(3) in November 2023, Harris failed to assist a student who soiled themselves in 
class, and when she was notified by another student this had happened, Harris 
failed to determine whether the student had, in fact, soiled themselves. When 
questioned about this incident, Harris denied the student had soiled themselves 
while in her class but admitted she noticed the student’s pants were soiled 
when the student was exiting her class at the time of dismissal. The student 
went home in soiled clothing and had a fever of 102 degrees at the time of 
dismissal (SOC, ¶¶ 4–5); 
(4) in November 2023, Harris made unprofessional comments to a school 
counselor and the school principal after the counselor pulled one of Harris’s 
students out of her class for 10 minutes (SOC, ¶ 6); 3 (5) Harris operated a hidden camera in her classroom that recorded District 
students, parents, and staff between August 2023 and May 2024 without the 
District’s knowledge or approval (SOC, ¶ 7); and  
(6) shortly after being placed on administrative leave on April 8, 2024, when 
Harris was permitted to return to her classroom to retrieve her personal 
belongings, Harris instead damaged District property, including the classroom 
walls and student work product, emptied the contents of student pencil cases 
onto the floor in a manner that made it impossible to distinguish which items 
belonged to which student, and threw a brand new textbook in the trash. When 
Harris was allowed to return to finish retrieving her personal property the next 
day, she instead opened file cabinets in her classroom and removed student 
work product (SOC, ¶ 9). 
The SOC alleges the following grounds for dismissal: 
(1) immoral conduct under Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(1) 
(subsequent undesignated statutory references are to the Education Code); 
(2) dishonesty under section 44932, subdivision (a)(4);  
(3) evident unfitness for service under section 44932, subdivision (a)(6); and  
(4) persistent violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of the state or 
reasonable regulations prescribed for the government of the public schools by 
the state board or by the governing board of the school district employing her 
under section 44932, subdivision (a)(8). 
The SOC further alleges the following grounds for immediate suspension 
without pay under section 44969, subdivision (b): (1) immoral conduct, and (2) willful 4 refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by 
reasonable rules and regulations of the employing school district. 
On September 13, 2024, Harris filed the Motion, seeking immediate reversal of 
the District’s decision to suspend her without pay. The Motion contends Harris should 
not be immediately suspended because: (1) the charges in the SOC are impermissibly 
vague or uncertain; (2) certain allegations in the SOC are beyond the statute of 
limitations for teacher dismissal proceedings; (3) the SOC fails to allege acts 
amounting to immoral conduct; and (4) the SOC fails to allege acts amounting to a 
willful refusal to perform her regular assignments without reasonable cause. 
On October 1, 2024, the District filed an Amended Opposition to the Motion. 
On October 4, 2024, Harris filed her Reply. 
The ALJ reviewed and considered the SOC, the written submissions of the 
parties, and the oral argument made during the hearing on the Motion. For the 
reasons stated below, the Motion is DENIED. 
Legal Standard 
Section 44939, subdivision (b), provides that a school district may immediately 
suspend a permanent certificated employee who has been charged with certain 
specified conduct. Section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), allows a suspended employee to 
file a motion for review of the suspension, and review of that motion “shall be limited 
to a determination as to whether the facts as alleged in the statement of charges, if 
true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension under this section.”
Motions made under section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), are analogous to a 
demurrer because the properly pleaded facts in the statement of charges must be 5 accepted as true in resolving the motion. That said, the ALJ need not accept 
“contentions, deductions or conclusions of fact or law.” ( (1985) 
39 Cal.3d 311, 318.) Additionally, as with a demurrer, “conclusory characterization of 
[an employee’s] conduct as intentional, willful and fraudulent” is “patently insufficient.” 
(See, e.g., (1977) 73 Cal.App.3d 864, 872.)
Applicable Law 
IMMORAL CONDUCT 
Engaging in immoral conduct is a basis for a teacher’s dismissal as well as their 
immediate suspension. (§§ 44932, subd. (a)(1); 44939, subd. (b).) “Immoral conduct” 
has been defined as conduct 
which is hostile to the welfare of the general public and 
contrary to good morals. [It] has not been confined to 
sexual matters, but includes conduct inconsistent with 
rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, 
dissoluteness; or as willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct 
showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable 
members of the community, and as an inconsiderate 
attitude toward good order and the public welfare.
( (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 
811 ( );  (1970) 9 Cal. App.3d 967, 972.) The 
term “immoral conduct” has been used interchangeably with the term “moral 
turpitude” which in turn is sometimes used as synonymous with dishonesty or a high 
degree of unfairness. ( , 179 Cal.App.2d at p. 811.) Moreover, as noted in 
(1969) 1 Cal. 3d 214, 224, “immoral conduct” is 6 not “considered in the abstract. It must be considered in the context in which the 
Legislature considered it, as conduct which is hostile . . . to the welfare of the school 
community.” 
WILLFUL REFUSAL TO PERFORM REGULAR ASSIGNMENTS WITHOUT 
REASONABLE CAUSE 
Willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause (“willful
refusal”) is a basis for a teacher’s immediate suspension. (§ 44939, subd. (b).) Willful 
refusal is distinguished, however, from other forms of conduct that may subject a 
teacher to dismissal but not immediate suspension. These include, for example, 
unprofessional conduct, unsatisfactory performance, and persistent violation of the 
school district’s reasonable regulations. (See § 44932, subds. (a)(2), (a)(3), and (a)(8).) 
Thus, the threshold for immediate suspension is higher than the threshold for 
dismissal—unsatisfactory performance or even persistent violation of school district 
regulations is not enough. Rather, the employee’s refusal to perform their regular 
assignment must have been “willful.”
In the context of a public employee’s engaging in “willful” misconduct, the term 
“willful” “carries a volitional coloration which excludes the notion of accidental or even 
negligent conduct.” (  (1963) 215 Cal. App. 2d 770, 775.) 
Consequently, a willful refusal to perform a regular assignment must be more than an 
unsatisfactory, unprofessional, negligent, or even persistent failure to perform a 
regular assignment; instead, it must be an intentional, volitional refusal to perform any 
part of a regular assignment. 7 Analysis – Immoral Conduct
Here, the District has alleged sufficient facts in the SOC that, if true, could 
constitute immoral conduct and thus are sufficient to support Harris’s immediate 
suspension. Specifically, the District alleged Harris exhibited a callus disregard for a 
kindergarten student’s health and well-being by failing to determine whether the 
student had soiled themselves in class, and then upon noticing the student’s pants 
were soiled at the time of dismissal, did nothing to assist the student. Those 
allegations, if proven, could constitute immoral conduct. Similarly, the allegations that 
Harris damaged District property and student work product, as well as created a mess 
in her classroom by emptying the contents of the students’ pencil cases onto the 
classroom floor, could constitute immoral conduct if proven. Finally, the allegations 
that Harris surreptitiously recorded her classroom, including students, parents, and 
staff without the District’s knowledge or consent, and in violation of District policy, 
could constitute immoral conduct if proven. 
Analysis – Willful Refusal 
Given the above, it is unnecessary to consider the District’s claim of willful 
refusal. 
Harris’s Contentions 
Harris argues that the SOC is not sufficiently certain because it does not specify 
which allegations support which bases for immediate suspension. This argument is 
meritless. As noted above, the legal standard here is similar to a demurrer; demurrers 
for uncertainty are disfavored and are granted only if the pleading is so 
incomprehensible that a responding party cannot reasonably respond. (
(2017) 14 Cal.App.5th 841, 848, fn. 3.) In other words, 8 where a pleading contains “substantive factual allegations sufficiently apprising 
defendant of the issues it is being asked to meet, a demurrer for uncertainty should be 
overruled[.]” ( (1986) 185 Cal.App.3d 135, 139, 
fn. 2.) The District’s SOC meets this low bar. 
Harris also argues that allegations about conduct occurring four years before 
the filing of the SOC are improper because evidence about that conduct cannot be 
introduced by the District in the dismissal proceeding. (See § 44944, subd. (b)(2)(A).) 
But the conduct discussed above that could amount to immoral conduct occurred well
within the limitations period. Thus, Harris’s statute of limitations argument does not 
support granting the Motion.
Disposition
For the reasons stated above, Harris’s Motion for Immediate Reversal of 
Suspension is DENIED.
IT IS SO ORDERED.
DATE:
TAYLOR STEINBACHER
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings
BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
In the Matter of the 
Motion for Immediate Reversal of Suspension by: 
KATELAND JEAN HARTE, a Permanent Certificated Employee, 
Moving Party, 
v. 
SAN FRANCISCO UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, 
Responding Party. 
OAH No. 2024010615 
ORDER DENYING MOTION 
FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF SUSPENSION 
(Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(4)) 
Administrative Law Judge Juliet E. Cox, State of California, Office of 
Administrative Hearings, heard this matter on February 9, 2024, by videoconference. 
Attorney Clarissa Romero represented moving party Kateland Jean Harte, who was not 
present. Senior Deputy General Counsel Christine Lee represented responding party 
San Francisco Unified School District. 
  2 Moving party Kateland Jean Harte is a permanent certificated employee of 
responding party San Francisco Unified School District (SFUSD). SFUSD filed and 
served a statement of charges against Harte on December 12, 2023, alleging cause to 
terminate her employment with SFUSD. SFUSD also employment, 
without pay, effective that same day. 
Harte filed a timely motion for immediate reversal of her unpaid suspension. 
SFUSD opposes this motion. The parties provided written and oral argument. 
Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b), authorizes a school district 
immediately to suspend a permanent employee of the school district who the district 
has charged with willful refusal to perform regular 
assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and 
regulations of the employing school district A timely motion to reverse the 
whether the facts as 
alleged in the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for 
 44939, subd. (c)(1).) Ruling on the motion is 
without prejudice to consideration by the Commission on Professional Competence, 
based upon the full evidentiary record before it, of the validity of the grounds for 
dismissal. , subd. (c)(4).) 
In this matter, the SFUSD statement of charges against Harte alleges facts that, 
if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension on grounds both 
of immoral conduct and of willful refusal to perform regular assignments without 
reasonable cause. 3ORDER
The motion by Kateland Jean Harte for immediate reversal of her suspension 
from employment with SFUSD, and for reimbursement of pay and benefits during the 
suspension period, is denied.
DATE:
JULIET E. COX
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings
