BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 
Suspension of: 
CONNIE STEINMAN, Moving Party, 
A Permanent Certificated Employee 
v. 
SACRAMENTO CITY UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, Responding 
Party 
OAH No. 2024101047 
ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 
SUSPENSION 
Robert Walker, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings 
(OAH), State of California, heard oral argument in this matter by Zoom 
videoconference on November 22, 2024. 
Katrina Gould, Attorney at Law, represented the moving party, Connie Steinman.
Seth Eckstein, Attorney at Law, and Komathy Vishakan, Attorney at Law,
represented the responding party, Sacramento City Unified School District (district).2 The matter was submitted for decision on November 22, 2024. 
On or about October 29, 2024, the district filed a request to set a hearing. The 
request to set contained a Notice of Intent to Dismiss; Placement on Unpaid 
Suspension Pending Outcome of Disciplinary Proceedings; and Statement of Charges
(Statement of Charges), seeking the immediate suspension without pay and dismissal 
of Ms. Steinman, a permanent certificated employee. The Statement of Charges alleges 
the following causes for dismissal: immoral conduct; dishonesty; evident unfitness for 
service; and persistent violation of or refusal to obey state school laws or regulations 
prescribed by the district’s governing board (willful refusal). (Ed. Code, §§ 44932, subd. 
(a)(1), (a)(4), (a)(6) & (a)(8).)1 The district also alleges cause to immediately suspend Ms. 
Steinman without pay for immoral conduct. (§ 44939.) 
The October 29, 2024, request to set also contained Ms. Steinman’s Motion for
Immediate Reversal of Suspension, pursuant to Section 44939, subdivision (c), alleging 
that the Statement of Charges does not set forth facts sufficient to support the 
allegations of immoral conduct or willful refusal. 
On November 12, 2024, the district filed an Opposition to Motion for Immediate 
Reversal of Suspension, arguing that the district has sufficiently pled allegations that, if 
true, are sufficient to support suspension without pay.
On November 19, 2024, Ms. Steinman filed a Reply in Support of Motion for 
Immediate Reversal of Suspension.
 
1 All further statutory references are to the Education Code.3 Section 44939, subdivision (b), authorizes the district to suspend an employee 
without pay pending the outcome of a hearing based on immoral conduct or refusal 
to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause. Subdivision (c)(1), allows 
the employee to file a motion for relief from the suspension and requires review of this 
motion to be “limited to a determination as to whether the facts as alleged in the 
statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate 
suspension under this section.” 
There is broad discretion in determining what constitutes immoral conduct in 
the context of teacher disciplinary matters. (
(1999) 20 Cal.4th 327.) Immoral conduct has been defined by the courts as 
follows:
[T]hat which is hostile to the welfare of the general public 
and contrary to good morals. Immorality has not been 
confined to sexual matters, but includes conduct 
inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, 
indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; or as wilful, flagrant, or 
shameless conduct showing moral indifference to the 
opinions of respectable members of the community, and as 
an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public 
welfare.
(  (1970) 9 Cal.App.3d 967, 972, citing 
, 179 Cal. App 2d 808, 811.) 
Immoral conduct cannot serve as a basis to terminate a teacher unless the 
conduct also indicates the teacher is unfit to teach. ( at p. 972.) The 4 definition of immoral or unprofessional conduct must be considered in conjunction 
with the unique position of public school teachers, on whom are imposed 
“responsibilities and limitations on freedom of action which do not exist in regard to 
other callings.” ( (1971) 16 Cal.App.3d 820, 824.)
In (2020) 53 Cal.App.5th 327, 
337, the court rejected Ms. Crawford’s contention that there are three fixed categories 
of conduct that constitute “immoral conduct” as a matter of law. Instead, the court 
held that the term “immoral conduct” as used in Section 44932, “stretch[es] over so 
wide a range” of conduct that it “embrace[s] an unlimited area of conduct.” ( , 
citing (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 224-225.) Citing 
at p. 224, the court added, the term must be “‘considered in the 
context in which the Legislature considered it, as conduct which is hostile to the 
welfare of the general public . . . more specifically in this case,
’” [citations] ( at p. 337). “A teacher's 
conduct is therefore “immoral” under section 44932, subdivision (a)(1), when it 
negatively affects the school community in a way that demonstrates the teacher is 
‘unfit to teach.’” ( [footnote omitted].) The court then addressed Ms. Crawford’s 
argument that the term should be given a colloquial interpretation that includes only 
conduct that would be deemed “immoral” in an everyday sense, such as criminal 
activity and using profanity or racial epithets. ( at p. 338.) The court wrote, 
We disagree. Immoral conduct “stretch[es] over so wide a 
range that [it] embrace[s] an unlimited area of conduct.” 
( , at pp. 224-225.) Thus, “the proper criteria 
is fitness to teach” because the term “immoral conduct” is 5 “so broad and vague” that it is “constitutionally infirm.” 
(citation.) 
(.)
In the present case, the written submissions and oral arguments have been 
considered. It is determined that the district alleged facts in the Statement of Charges 
that, if true, support a finding of immoral conduct and support immediate suspension 
under section 44939, subdivision (b). 
ORDER 
The motion for immediate reversal of suspension is denied. 
 
DATE: November 27, 2024
ROBERT WALKER
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings