BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 
Suspension of: 
KELLI STEITZ, Moving Party, 
And 
ROSEVILLE CITY SCHOOL DISTRICT, Responding Party  
OAH No. 2024010572 
ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 
SUSPENSION 
Kimberly J. Belvedere, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ), Office of Administrative 
Hearings (OAH), State of California, heard oral argument in this matter by 
videoconference on February 16, 2024.
Matthew Chevedden, Langkamp, Curtis, Price, Lindstrom & Chevedden LLP, 
represented Kelli Steitz, Moving Party. 
Jaspreet Lochab-Dogra, Lozano Smith, represented the Roseville City School 
District, Responding Party. 2On December 12, 2023, the district provided Steitz with a “Notice of Intent to 
Dismiss and Statement of Charges; Placement on Unpaid Suspension Pending 
Outcome of Disciplinary Proceedings, Statement of Charges” (Statement of Charges), 
and accompanying exhibits. On December 14, 2023, the district’s governing board 
voted in closed session to officially issue the Statement of Charges and place Steitz on 
immediate suspension. On January 4, 2024, the district served Steitz with a copy of the 
Statement of Charges and placed her on unpaid suspension pending the outcome of a 
formal dismissal hearing. The service of the Statement of Charges and placement of 
Steitz on unpaid leave on January 4, 2024, triggered Steitz’s ability to file a Motion for 
Immediate Reversal of Suspension (MIRS) pursuant to Section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), 
which she did, on January 19, 2024. At the time of the filing of the MIRS, the Statement 
of Charges was therefore the operative pleading. 
On February 5, 2024, the district filed a “Notice of Intent to Dismiss and 
Placement on Immediate Unpaid Suspension Pending Outcome of Disciplinary 
Proceedings; and Amended Statement of Charges” (Amended Statement of Charges), 
signed by Meghan Baichtal, the Assistant Superintendent of Personnel Services. Steitz 
contends, among other things, that the original Statement of Charges should be the 
one considered for purposes of the MIRS and not the Amended Statement of Charges, 
and that Statement of Charges does not meet the basic pleading requirements of 
Section 44934. The district contends “it would be improper for the ALJ, under 
Education Code section 44939, to even entertain [Steitz’s] argument” concerning the 
district’s compliance with section 44934, as review of a MIRS is limited only to a 
determination as to “whether the facts as alleged in the statement of charges, if true, 
are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension . . . .” 
Section 44939, in its entirety, provides: 3 (a) This section applies only to dismissal or suspension 
proceedings initiated pursuant to Section 44934.
(b) Upon the filing of written charges, duly signed and 
verified by the person filing them with the governing board 
of a school district, or upon a written statement of charges 
formulated by the governing board of a school district, 
charging a permanent employee of the school district with 
immoral conduct, conviction of a felony or of any crime 
involving moral turpitude, with incompetency due to mental 
disability, with willful refusal to perform regular 
assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by
reasonable rules and regulations of the employing school 
district, or with violation of Section 51530, the governing 
board of the school district may, if it deems that action 
necessary, immediately suspend the employee from his or 
her duties and give notice to him or her of his or her 
suspension, and that 30 days after service of the notice of 
dismissal, he or she will be dismissed, unless he or she 
demands a hearing. 
(c)(1) An employee who has been placed on suspension 
pursuant to this section may serve and file with the Office 
of Administrative Hearings a motion for immediate reversal 
of suspension. Review of a motion filed pursuant to this 
section shall be limited to a determination as to whether 
the facts as alleged in the statement of charges, if true, are 4 sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension 
under this section. The motion shall include a memorandum 
of points and authorities setting forth law and argument 
supporting the employee's contention that the statement of 
charges does not set forth a sufficient basis for immediate 
suspension. 
(2) The motion shall be served upon the governing board of 
the school district and filed with the Office of Administrative 
Hearings within 30 days after service upon the employee of 
the initial pleading in the matter. The governing board of 
the school district has the right to serve and file a written 
response to the motion before or at the time of hearing.
(3) The hearing on the motion for immediate reversal of 
suspension shall be held no later than 30 days after the 
motion is filed with the Office of Administrative Hearings. 
(4) The administrative law judge shall, no later than 15 days 
after the hearing, issue an order denying or granting the 
motion. The order shall be in writing, and a copy of the 
order shall be served by the Office of Administrative 
Hearings upon the parties. The grant or denial of the 
motion shall be without prejudice to consideration by the 
Commission on Professional Competence, based upon the 
full evidentiary record before it, of the validity of the 
grounds for dismissal. The ruling shall not be considered by 
the commission in determining the validity of the grounds 5 for dismissal, and shall not have any bearing on the 
commission's determination regarding the grounds for 
dismissal. 
(5) An order granting a motion for immediate reversal of 
suspension shall become effective within five days of service 
of the order. The school district shall make the employee 
whole for any lost wages, benefits, and compensation 
within 14 days after service of an order granting the motion.
(6) A motion made pursuant to this section shall be the 
exclusive means of obtaining interlocutory review of 
suspension pending dismissal. The grant or denial of the 
motion is not subject to interlocutory judicial review. 
(d) A motion for immediate reversal of suspension pursuant 
to this section does not affect the authority of a governing 
board of a school district to determine the physical 
placement and assignment of an employee who is 
suspended or placed on administrative leave during the 
review of the motion or while dismissal charges are 
pending. 
As such, review of a MIRS is limited to a determination of whether the facts 
alleged in the operative pleading are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate 
suspension, and not whether the pre-hearing procedural requirements to initiate 
disciplinary proceedings were followed. The operative pleading is the Amended 
Statement of Charges, which superseded the Statement of Charges upon its filing with 6OAH. Further, although the Amended Statement of Charges was filed after Steitz filed 
the MIRS, Steitz’s Reply to the district’s Opposition in response to the MIRS was filed 
after the Amended Statement of Charges, therefore affording her an opportunity to 
set forth an argument regarding whether the allegations in the Amended Statement of 
Charges are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension. In other words, 
Steitz had a meaningful opportunity to address whether the factual allegations set 
forth in the Amended Statement of Charges, if true, constitute a basis for immediate 
suspension under Section 44939. 
It is determined that the district failed to allege facts which, if true, constitute 
immoral conduct (Section 44932, subdivision (a)(1), Amended Statement of Charges at 
¶¶ 1-16.) However, the district did allege sufficient facts to constitute willful refusal to 
perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable 
rules and regulations of the employing school district (Section 44939, subdivision (b), 
Amended Statement of Charges at ¶¶ 1-13, 31, 32.) As such, the district alleged 
sufficient facts to constitute a basis for immediate suspension under Education Code 
section 44939, subdivision (b). 
This conclusion is based on the MIRS and its attachments, district’s opposition 
and its attachments, and Steitz’s Reply to the district’s opposition. All arguments, 
written and oral, were considered. All objections by Steitz to the district’s opposition 
and exhibits are overruled. 
// 
// 7ORDER
The motion for immediate reversal of the suspension of Kelli Steitz is denied.
DATE: February 20, 2024
KIMBERLY J. BELVEDERE
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings
