BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 
Suspension of: 
KARSTEN PARKER, Moving Party 
v. 
LOS ANGELES UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, Responding Party 
OAH No. 2024050497 
ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 
SUSPENSION 
Debra D. Nye-Perkins, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative 
Hearings (OAH), State of California, heard oral argument on this matter by Zoom 
videoconference on June 7, 2024.
Karsten Parker, moving party, appeared on his own behalf. 
Brian Davenport, Assistant General Counsel II, represented the Los Angeles 
Unified School District. 
The matter was submitted for decision on June 7, 2024. 2On or about March 15, 2024, the district’s Chief Human Resources Officer 
signed a Statement of Charges seeking the immediate suspension without pay and 
dismissal of Mr. Parker, a permanent certificated employee. The statement of charges 
and related documents were served on Mr. Parker on April 10, 2024. The statement of 
charges alleges the following causes for dismissal: immoral conduct, including 
egregious misconduct; immoral conduct; unprofessional conduct; unsatisfactory 
performance; evident unfitness for service; persistent violation of or refusal to obey 
state school laws or regulations prescribed by the district’s governing board; and 
willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause. (Ed. Code, §§
44939 and 44932, subd. (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(5), (a)(6) & (a)(8).)1The district also alleges 
cause to immediately suspend Mr. Parker without pay based on the allegations. (§§ 
44934 and 44939.) 
The district did not receive any demand for hearing from Mr. Parker by the 
expiration of thirty days from the April 10, 2024, date of service of the statement of 
charges. Accordingly, by letter dated May 10, 2024, the district notified Mr. Parker that 
he was dismissed as a certified employee of the district effective May 10, 2024. That 
May 10, 2024, notification was served on Mr. Parker by the district on May 11, 2024.
On May 13, 2024, Mr. Parker submitted an untimely request for hearing, notice 
of defense and his Motion for Immediate Reversal of Suspension with OAH. Mr. 
Parker’s Motion for Immediate Reversal of Suspension is half-a-page in length and 
makes only one argument related only to charge seven of the nine alleged charges in 
the Statement of Charges alleging that Mr. Parker fell asleep during instructional time 
 
1 All further statutory references are to the Education Code. 3on three dates causing him to fail to provide instruction. Mr. Parker does not address 
the allegations regarding inappropriate behavior that were indicative of grooming 
students under 18 years old. 
With regard to charge seven, Mr. Parker argues that he fell asleep as a result of 
a medical condition, namely Long COVID symptoms of extreme fatigue and brain fog, 
and that the district did not give him accommodations for that disability as required 
by Government Code section 12940, subdivision (n). Mr. Parker made no arguments 
regarding any of the remaining eight charges in the Statement of Charges. 
The district filed an opposition to the motion on May 28, 2024, arguing as an 
initial matter that Mr. Parker has waived his right to a hearing before OAH, and that 
OAH has no jurisdiction to hear the matter because Mr. Parker is no longer an 
employee of the district. In the alternative, the district argued that it has sufficiently 
pled allegations, that if true, are sufficient to support suspension without pay for 
immoral conduct.  
On June 6, 2024, Mr. Parker submitted a reply to OAH that addresses the issue 
of his untimely appeal. He did not, however, include proof of service with this 
submission showing its service on the district. However, at oral argument Mr. Parker 
provided the same argument as contained in that reply regarding the issue of his 
untimely appeal. 
As an initial matter, because Mr. Parker failed to timely file a notice of defense, 
and his position has already been terminated by the district, OAH does not have 
jurisdiction to hear this matter. No request to set a hearing on Mr. Parker’s termination 
has been provided to OAH, and no hearing on that matter is forthcoming. 4Assuming arguendo that Mr. Parker has not waived his right to a hearing 
related to the Statement of Charges, the following analysis regarding his Motion for 
Immediate Reversal of Suspension applies. 
Section 44939, subdivision (b), authorizes the district to suspend an employee 
without pay pending the outcome of the hearing based on immoral conduct. 
Subdivision (c)(1) allows the employee to file a motion for relief from the suspension 
and requires review of this motion to be “limited to a determination as to whether the 
facts as alleged in the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis 
for immediate suspension under this section.”
There is broad discretion in determining what constitutes immoral conduct in 
the context of teacher disciplinary matters. (
(1999) 20 Cal.4th 327.) Immoral conduct has been defined by the courts as 
follows:
[T]hat which is hostile to the welfare of the general public 
and contrary to good morals. Immorality has not been 
confined to sexual matters, but includes conduct 
inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, 
indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; or as wilful, flagrant, or 
shameless conduct showing moral indifference to the 
opinions of respectable members of the community, and as 
an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public 
welfare.5( (1970) 9 Cal.App.3d 967, 972, citing 
, 179 Cal. App 2d 808, 
811.)
Immoral conduct alone cannot serve as a basis to terminate a teacher unless the 
conduct indicates the teacher is also unfit to teach. ( at p. 972.) The 
definition of immoral or unprofessional conduct must be considered in conjunction 
with the unique position of public school teachers, upon whom are imposed 
“responsibilities and limitations on freedom of action which do not exist in regard to 
other callings.” ( (1971) 16 Cal.App.3d 820, 824.)
In (2020) 53 Cal.App.5th 339, 
337, the court rejected Ms. Crawford’s contention that there are three fixed categories 
of conduct that constitute “immoral conduct” as a matter of law. Instead the court 
held the term “immoral conduct” in Section 44932, “stretch[es] over so wide a range” 
of conduct that it “embrace[s] an unlimited area of conduct.” ( , citing 
(1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 224-225.) Citing at p. 
224, the court added, the term must be “‘considered in the context in which the 
Legislature considered it, as conduct which is hostile to the welfare of the general 
public . . . more specifically in this case,
’”[citations] ( at p. 337 [italics in original].) “A teacher's 
conduct is therefore “immoral” under section 44932, subdivision (a)(1), when it 
negatively affects the school community in a way that demonstrates the teacher is 
‘unfit to teach.’” ( [footnote omitted].) The court then addressed Ms. Crawford’s 
argument that the term should be given a colloquial interpretation that includes only 
conduct that would be deemed “immoral” in an everyday sense, such as criminal 
activity and using profanity or racial epithets. ( at p. 338.) The court wrote, 6We disagree. Immoral conduct “stretch[es] over so wide a 
range that [it] embrace[s] an unlimited area of conduct.”
([ , at pp. 224-225].) Thus, “the proper criteria 
is fitness to teach” because the term “immoral conduct” is 
“so broad and vague” that it is “constitutionally infirm.”
([citation].)
(Ibid.)
The parties’ written submissions and oral arguments having been considered, 
the district alleged sufficient facts in the Statement of Charges that, if true, could
constitute immoral conduct and support immediate suspension under section 44939, 
subdivision (b).
Based on the conclusion that OAH does not have jurisdiction to hear this matter 
because Mr. Parker’s employment has already been terminated, the motion for 
immediate reversal of suspension is denied. Alternatively, assuming arguendo OAH 
has jurisdiction, his motion is denied because the district alleged sufficient facts in the 
Statement of Charges that, if true, could constitute immoral conduct and support 
immediate suspension.
DATE: June 7, 2024
DEBRA D. NYE-PERKINS
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings
