BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 
Suspension of: 
FERNEY SANCHEZ, 
a Permanent Certificated Employee, 
Moving Party, 
v. 
SAN LEANDRO UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, 
Responding Party. 
OAH No. 2024120462 
ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR 
IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF SUSPENSION 
(Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(4)) 
Administrative Law Judge Michael C. Starkey, State of California, Office of 
Administrative Hearings, heard this matter on January 10, 2025, by videoconference. 2 Attorney Alex Leichenger represented moving party Ferney Sanchez.
Attorney Conor Kennedy represented responding party San Leandro Unified 
School District (District). 
Procedural History 
On November 12 and 13, 2024, respectively, the District filed and served a 
statement of charges against moving party Sanchez, alleging multiple causes for 
dismissal, including immoral conduct pursuant to Education Code section 44932, 
subdivision (a)(1). The District placed Sanchez on immediate suspension without pay 
pending hearing, pursuant to Education Code section 44939, based upon the charge 
of immoral conduct. 
On December 13, 2024, Sanchez timely filed a motion for immediate reversal of 
his suspension without pay pursuant to Education Code section 44939, subdivision 
(c)(4), arguing that the District has not alleged a sufficient basis to place him on 
immediate unpaid status because the allegations in the statement of charges do not 
state sufficient facts to constitute immoral conduct. In his motion, Sanchez requests an 
order reversing his suspension without pay. 
Discussion 
Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b), provides, in relevant part, that a 
school district may immediately suspend a permanent employee of the school district 
involving moral turpitude, with incompetency due to mental disability, with willful 
refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by 3reasonable rules and regulations of the employing school district, or with violation of 
Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), authorizes the permanent 
employee to seek review of the order of suspension by motion to the Office of 
Administrative Hearings. This section limits the review of a motion to immediately 
reverse a suspension
statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate 
The written submissions of the parties and their oral argument have been 
considered. Based upon a review of the charges, the District has alleged facts which, if 
true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension under Education 
Code section 44939, subdivision (b), on the grounds of immoral conduct.
ORDER
The motion for immediate reversal of the suspension of Ferney Sanchez by San 
Leandro Unified School District is denied.
DATE:
MICHAEL C. STARKEY
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings
