BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 
Suspension of: 
LEE SVOBODA, a Permanent Certificated Employee, 
Moving Party, 
and 
CONEJO VALLEY UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, 
Responding Party. 
OAH No. 2024040038 
ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 
SUSPENSION 
Cindy F. Forman, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings 
(OAH), State of California, heard this matter by videoconference on April 10, 2024.
Daniel J. Kolodziej, Esq., represented moving party Lee Svoboda (Teacher).
Ellen C. Wu, Esq., represented responding party Conejo Valley Unified School 
District (District).2 On February 8, 2024, the District served Teacher with a Notice of Intention to 
Dismiss and Immediate Suspension Without Pay (Notice) along with a Statement of 
Charges. The Notice informed Teacher of his immediate suspension without pay, 
effective February 8, 2024, pursuant to Education Code (Code) section 44939. On 
March 8, 2024, Teacher served a Request for Hearing and Notice of Defense and also 
moved for immediate reversal of the suspension under Code section 44939, 
subdivision (c)(1). 
Counsel for both parties presented oral arguments at the motion hearing. The 
parties did not dispute that the Statement of Charges, attached as Exhibit 1 to 
Teacher’s Motion, is the operative pleading for this proceeding. 
Motion for Immediate Reversal of Suspension 
A school district may immediately suspend without pay a permanent certificated 
employee charged with immoral conduct. (Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (b).) A suspended 
employee may file a motion for immediate reversal of the suspension with OAH. (Ed. 
Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(1).) An administrative law judge’s review of the suspended 
employee’s motion shall be “limited to a determination as to whether the facts as 
alleged in the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for 
immediate suspension under this section.” (Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(1).)
Although the administrative law judge must accept well-pleaded facts in the 
statement of charges as true, the administrative law judge need not accept 
contentions, deductions, or conclusions of fact or law. ( (1985) 39 Cal.3d 
311, 318 ( ).) Conclusory characterizations of conduct as intentional, willful, or 
fraudulent are “patently insufficient.” ( (1977) 73 Cal.App.3d 864, 
872.) Where reading the allegations reveals the existence of an affirmative defense, the 3 complaining party must plead around the defense by alleging specific facts that would 
avoid the apparent defense. (  39 Cal.3d at p. 318.) 
Statement of Charges 
During the relevant period, Teacher was employed by the District as an art 
teacher at Conejo Valley High School. The Statement of Charges alleges Teacher 
engaged in immoral conduct in violation of Code sections 44932, subdivision (a)(1), 
and 44939, persistently violated or refused to obey school laws and regulations in 
violation of Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(8), and his unfitness to teach is evident 
under Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(6). 
In support of its charge of immoral conduct, District makes at least 30 factual 
allegations about Teacher’s conduct starting in the 2019 to 2020 school year through 
the 2022 to 2023 school year. Teacher’s alleged immoral conduct falls within four 
categories. The first category involves charges Teacher made inappropriate, 
derogatory, immoral, unprofessional and/or improper actions and statements 
including referring to several students as “Jew #1” and “Jew #2”; telling a student “Yo, I 
have a pair for your mom,” or words to that effect, while pointing at his “privates”; 
licking a cookie in a “weird” way while looking at students; talking to students about 
setting up an “Only Cats” app, which appeared to refer to the “Only Fans” website, a 
platform allowing users to share sexually explicit content; regularly using profanity in 
class in the presence of students, including “fuck” and “bitch,” tolerating his students’ 
use of profanity, and playing music in class with profanity, including use of the “n” 
word; holding a flower and saying it smelled like marijuana, then passing it to his 
students to smell, and after one student said smelling the flower gave her a headache, 
calling her a “pussy” or words to that effect; referring to a District wellness counselor 
as a “bitch” or words to that effect; referring to the Principal of Alternative Education 4 as “annoying,” a “bitch,” and having “a stick up his ass” or words to that effect; 
speaking negatively about students from other classes; making fun of another teacher,
saying the teacher “clutches” and “walks with a stick up his ass” or words to that effect, 
and demonstrating in front of the class how the teacher walked; ranking black 
students by the darkness of their skin; describing an individual of the LGBTQ+ 
community as a “fruitcake” or words to that effect; teasing a student about “pooping 
his pants” or words to that effect; telling a student to “check your bitch ass attitude” or 
words to that effect: and on March 11, 2020, sending an unspecified payment via 
Venmo to a student including a note stating “From Penis man” or words to that effect. 
(Statement of Charges, ¶ 2.) 
The second category involves Teacher’s promotion and tolerance of sexually 
explicit images. Specifically, the District alleges in May 2023, student M.F. told Teacher 
the name of his motorcycle was “Smallz.” In response, Teacher said “Does that bike 
have a small wiener too, guy?” or words to that effect. Teacher then gave his class an 
assignment to design a logo including the word “Smallz” and an image of a penis, 
which the students completed. On May 31, 2023, Teacher texted M.F. with pictures the 
students prepared. Additionally, Teacher permitted students to prepare and display 
artwork in his classroom and on the classroom’s online platform depicting sexually 
explicit and pornographic images, gang symbols, the Playboy logo, images of weapons 
or depicting violence, and profane and defamatory language. (Statement of Charges, ¶ 
3.) 
The third category involves Teacher requesting food and favors from his 
students. The Statement of Charges alleges Teacher told at least one student he would 
receive five credits if he brought Teacher food and further alleges other students sent 
money to Teacher via Venmo with notes stating, “5 credits,” “98%” or “100%” or words 5 to that effect. Teacher is also alleged to have asked several students for benefits from 
their jobs and specifically requested a student to get him discounted tires for his 
vehicle. After the student provided Teacher with the tires, the student texted Teacher 
telling him he was owed “5 credits and one penis painting.” The student also told 
Teacher when picking up the tires he was to tell the “faggot at the front” that Teacher 
was the student’s uncle. Teacher did not address the student’s offensive slur or the 
deceit of pretending to be his uncle. Teacher then texted the student to come over 
because his “Aunt Jenny wants to make her famous sausage cream pie . . .  extra thick 
this time!!” to which the student responded, “Oh that’s awesome not too thick now.” 
(Statement of Charges, ¶ 4.) 
The fourth category involves Teacher’s references to marijuana in the classroom 
The Statement of Charges alleges during the 2022 to 2023 school year, Teacher 
repeatedly talked about marijuana during class with his students. Specifically, he told 
his class, that “he smokes marijuana every day” or words to that effect, and on at least 
one occasion told a student he “can get them weed” or words to that effect. Students 
also smoked marijuana in Teacher’s side room during the 2020 to 2021 school year 
without Teacher preventing such conduct from happening. (Statement of Charges, ¶ 5.) 
The District contends the foregoing conduct warrants Teacher’s immediate 
dismissal without pay. Teacher contends the District failed to plead sufficient facts to 
support a charge for immoral conduct. Teacher also acknowledges his conduct might 
have been inappropriate but asserts the conduct was not immoral because he was 
never arrested or jailed for the alleged conduct, never caused serious or lasting trauma 
or discomfort to any student, and never intended to do harm or seek personal 
gratification from his conduct. Additionally, Teacher contends the District’s claims of 
immoral conduct are conclusory and the District failed to provide any context of the 6 alleged incidents to give the appearance of having satisfied the requisite pleading 
standard. 
Immoral Conduct 
Immoral conduct has been defined as conduct “‘hostile to the welfare of the 
general public and contrary to good morals. Immorality has not been confined to 
sexual matters, but includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of 
corruption, indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; or as wil[l]ful, flagrant, or shameless 
conduct showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the 
community, and as an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public 
welfare.’” (  ( ) 
(1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811, quoting (1951) 36 
Cal.2d 734, 740.) Because of the breadth of its definition, immoral conduct must be 
“’considered in the context in which the Legislature considered it, as conduct which is 
hostile to the welfare of the general public . . . more specifically in this case, conduct 
which is hostile to the welfare of the school community.’” (
(1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 224, citation omitted.) Additionally, when assessing 
immoral conduct, “the unique position of public school teachers, upon whom are 
imposed ‘responsibilities and limitations on freedom of action which do not exist in 
regard to other callings’” must be taken into account. (
(2011) 194 Cal.App.4th 1454, 1466.)
Analysis 
Certain of the allegations of Teacher’s misconduct in his actions towards 
students, if true, are sufficient to sustain Teacher’s immediate suspension based on 
immoral conduct. Specifically, calling several students Jew #1 and Jew #2; ranking 7 black students by the color of their skin; mocking the physical attributes of another
teacher in front of the class; seeking favors and discounts from students while 
cultivating at least a belief that providing such items would improve students’ grades;
making a sexual joke about a student’s mother; and discussing Teacher’s daily use of 
marijuana with students and his ability to access marijuana for his students are 
offensive, indecent, and depraved acts that show flagrant or shameless indifference to 
community standards and/or are hostile to the students in Teacher’s classroom. 
(Statement of Charges, ¶¶ 2, subds. (a), (b), (j), (k); 4, subds. (a)–(g); 5, subd. (a).) 
Contrary to Teacher’s contention, the absence of any allegations in the 
Statement of Charges that Teacher’s conduct was criminal or caused actual physical 
harm is not dispositive of any determination of whether the facts as alleged in the 
Statement of Charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate 
suspension. ( (1970) 9 Cal.App.3d 967, 974 [finding 
that licking a classroom wall in a vulgar manner constitutes immoral conduct].) Nor are 
Teacher’s claims that the alleged conduct was unintentional or simply a product of bad 
judgment persuasive. Immoral conduct and bad judgment are not mutually exclusive, 
and immoral conduct as defined by  does not require ill intent. 
While some of the facts pleaded in the Statement of Charges may not by 
themselves be enough to support an immoral conduct charge, certain of the pleaded 
facts, as noted above, if true, are sufficient to support the charge. These factual 
allegations therefore constitute a basis for immediate suspension without pay under 
Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1). Accordingly, the Motion for Immediate Reversal 
of Suspension is denied. 8ORDER
The motion by Lee Svoboda for immediate reversal of his suspension without 
pay is denied.
DATE:
CINDY F. FORMAN
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings
