BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 
Suspension of: 
MARITZA MARTINEZ, Moving Party 
v. 
ORCUTT UNION SCHOOL DISTRICT, Responding Party 
OAH No. 2024050175 
ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 
SUSPENSION 
Adam L. Berg, Presiding Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative 
Hearings (OAH), State of California, heard oral argument on this matter by Zoom 
videoconference on May 10, 2024.
Justin M. Crane, Attorney at Law with The Myers Law Group, A.P.C., represented 
moving party, Maritza Martinez. 
Daniel M. McElhinney, Attorney at Law with Lozano Smith represented Orcutt 
Union School District. 
The matter was submitted for decision on May 10, 2024. 2 On or about March 15, 2024, the district’s Assistant Superintendent of Human 
Resources served Ms. Martinez with a “Notice of Intent to Dismiss; Statement of 
Charges for Dismissal; and Immediate Suspension Without Pay” (Statement of 
Charges) seeking the immediate suspension without pay and dismissal of Ms. 
Martinez, a permanent certificated employee. The statement of charges alleges the 
following causes for dismissal: immoral conduct; dishonesty; evident unfitness for 
service; and persistent violation of or refusal to obey state school laws or regulations 
prescribed by the district’s governing board. (Ed. Code, §§ 44932, subd. (a)(1), (a)(4), 
(a)(6) & (a)(8).)1 The district also alleges cause to immediately suspend Ms. Martinez 
without pay for immoral conduct and willful refusal to perform regular assignments 
without reasonable cause, as prescribed by the reasonable rules and regulations of the 
employing school district (willful refusal). (§ 44939, subd. (b).) 
On April 12, 2024, Ms. Martinez filed a Motion for Immediate Reversal of 
Suspension with OAH, pursuant to Section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), alleging that the 
Statement of Charges does not set forth facts sufficient to support the allegations of 
immoral conduct or willful refusal required to impose an immediate suspension. Ms. 
Martinez also argues that the district failed to allege sufficient facts to show that its 
governing board deemed her unpaid suspension “necessary” as specified in Section 
44939, subdivision (b). The district filed an opposition to the motion on May 8, 2024. 
On May 10, 2024, the parties presented additional oral arguments. 
Section 44939, subdivision (b), authorizes the district to suspend an employee 
without pay pending the outcome of the hearing based on immoral conduct. 
 
1 All further statutory references are to the Education Code. 3 Subdivision (c)(1), allows the employee to file a motion for relief from the suspension 
and requires review of this motion to be “limited to a determination as to whether the 
facts as alleged in the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis 
for immediate suspension under this section.” 
There is broad discretion in determining what constitutes immoral conduct in 
the context of teacher disciplinary matters. (
(1999) 20 Cal.4th 327.) Immoral conduct has been defined by the courts as 
follows:
[T]hat which is hostile to the welfare of the general public 
and contrary to good morals. Immorality has not been 
confined to sexual matters, but includes conduct 
inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, 
indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; or as wilful, flagrant, or 
shameless conduct showing moral indifference to the 
opinions of respectable members of the community, and as 
an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public 
welfare.
(  (1970) 9 Cal.App.3d 967, 972, citing 
, 179 Cal. App 2d 808, 811.)
Immoral conduct alone cannot serve as a basis to terminate a teacher unless the 
conduct indicates the teacher is also unfit to teach. ( at p. 972.) The 
definition of immoral or unprofessional conduct must be considered in conjunction 
with the unique position of public school teachers, upon whom are imposed 4 “responsibilities and limitations on freedom of action which do not exist in regard to 
other callings.” ( (1971) 16 Cal.App.3d 820, 824.)
In (2020) 53 Cal.App.5th 339, 
337, the court rejected Ms. Crawford’s contention that there are three fixed categories 
of conduct that constitute “immoral conduct” as a matter of law. Instead the court 
held the term “immoral conduct” as used in Section 44932, “stretch[es] over so wide a 
range” of conduct that it “embrace[s] an unlimited area of conduct.” ( , citing 
(1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 224-225.) Citing 
at p. 224, the court added, the term must be “‘considered in the context in 
which the Legislature considered it, as conduct which is hostile to the welfare of the 
general public . . . more specifically in this case,
’”[Citations.] ( at p. 337 [italics in original].) “A 
teacher's conduct is therefore “immoral” under section 44932, subdivision (a)(1), when 
it negatively affects the school community in a way that demonstrates the teacher is 
‘unfit to teach.’” ( [footnote omitted].) The court then addressed Ms. Crawford’s 
argument that the term should be given a colloquial interpretation that includes only 
conduct that would be deemed “immoral” in an everyday sense, such as criminal 
activity and using profanity or racial epithets. ( at p. 338.) The court wrote, 
We disagree. Immoral conduct “stretch[es] over so wide a 
range that [it] embrace[s] an unlimited area of conduct.” 
([ , at pp. 224-225].) Thus, “the proper criteria 
is fitness to teach” because the term “immoral conduct” is 
“so broad and vague” that it is “constitutionally infirm.” 
([Citation].) 
(.)5 The parties’ written submissions and oral arguments having been considered, 
the district alleged sufficient facts in the Statement of Charges that, if true, could 
constitute immoral conduct and support immediate suspension under section 44939, 
subdivision (b). 
Based on this finding, Ms. Martinez’s contention that the district has not 
established willful refusal need not be addressed. 
Finally, review of Ms. Martinez’s motion is “limited to a determination as to 
whether the facts as alleged in the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to 
constitute a basis for immediate suspension under this section.” (§ 44939, subd. (c)(1).) 
Accordingly, OAH is without jurisdiction to determine whether the district’s governing 
board properly determined her immediate suspension to be necessary. ( at subd. 
(b).) 
The motion for immediate reversal of suspension is DENIED.
DATE: May 16, 2024
ADAM L. BERG
Presiding Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings