BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 
Suspension of: 
STEVEN FARWELL, A Permanent Certificated Employee, 
Respondent and Moving Party 
OAH No. 2024010160 
ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 
SUSPENSION 
Sean Gavin, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings (OAH), 
State of California, heard this matter by videoconference on January 26, 2024, from 
Sacramento, California. 
Matthew Chevedden, Attorney at Law, represented respondent and moving 
party, Steven Farwell.
Steve Ngo, Attorney at Law, represented the Elk Grove Unified School District 
(the District).
The parties submitted written briefing before the hearing. The parties argued 
their positions and submitted the matter for decision on January 26, 2024.2Procedural History
On December 5, 2023, the District’s Chief Human Resources Officer signed and 
subsequently sent to respondent a Notice of Intent to Dismiss; Placement on 
Immediate Unpaid Suspension Pending Outcome of Dismissal Proceedings; and 
Statement of Charges (SOC). The SOC alleged grounds to terminate respondent under 
Education Code section 44932 for: (1) immoral conduct; (2) dishonesty; (3) evident 
unfitness for service; (4) persistent violation of, or refusal to obey, the school laws of 
the state or reasonable regulations prescribed for the government of the public 
schools by the state board or by the governing board of the school district employing 
him; and (5) conviction of a felony or any crime involving moral turpitude. (Ed. Code, 
§ 44932, subd. (a)(1), (4), (6), (8) & (9).) The SOC also alleged grounds to suspend 
respondent immediately without pay for immoral conduct and conviction of a felony 
or any crime involving moral turpitude. (Ed. Code, § 44939.) 
On January 8, 2024, respondent filed a Motion for Immediate Reversal of 
Suspension (Motion) pursuant to section 44939, subdivision (c), in which he argued the 
District must immediately reverse his suspension for three reasons. First, respondent 
argued the SOC does not state it was either written by or filed with the District’s 
governing board. Therefore, in respondent’s view, the District violated the 
requirements of Education Code section 44934, subdivision (b), which dictates the 
procedure for filing the SOC. As such, respondent argued, “if the [SOC] do[es] not 
meet the requirements of [section] 44934, the employee cannot be placed on unpaid 
leave pursuant to [section] 44939.” 
Second, respondent argued the District included allegations in the SOC that it 
cannot legally consider. Specifically, respondent argued the SOC includes allegations 3relating to matters that occurred more than four years before it filed the SOC, in 
violation of Education Code section 44944, subdivision (b)(2)(A). 
Separately, respondent argued the District cannot suspend him based on his 
conviction because he pled no contest to a misdemeanor. Finally, respondent argued if 
his conviction and conduct more than four years ago are excluded, the District’s 
remaining allegations do not constitute immoral conduct. 
The District filed a written opposition to respondent’s Motion, and respondent 
filed a written reply to the opposition. 
Facts as Alleged in the SOC 
Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c), requires the facts in the SOC to 
be treated as true for purposes of this Motion. Consequently, the statements below 
are not findings of fact, but rather summaries of the allegations as they appear in the 
SOC.
WARNINGS AND REPRIMANDS  
Respondent is a high school math teacher for the District. In June 2015, the 
District issued respondent a letter of reprimand for insulting, threatening, grabbing, 
and hitting students. In December 2016, the District issued respondent a letter of 
warning for being rude and confrontational in department staff meetings. In December 
2019 and April 2021, the District issued respondent a reprimand and a warning for 
inappropriate conduct towards students and staff. Specifically, in April 2021, the 
District reprimanded respondent because, 
[O]n March 4, 2021, [he] engaged in a racist, unprofessional, 
and inappropriate conversation in front of [his] students, 4when [he] and another colleague discussed the recent 
hiring of a woman of color into the math department. [He] 
criticized [the school’s] administrators and the Chair of the 
Math Department for hiring a woman of color, referring to 
them as “racist” to “hire a female and a non-white.”
Respondent made these comments during a videoconference while his 
microphone was unmuted and students in his class overheard him. Multiple students 
complained. When school administrators approached respondent about his 
comments, he ignored their emails and then ultimately denied making the comments.
CONVICTION AND SUSPENSION OF CREDENTIAL  
In January 2022, respondent was convicted, on his no contest plea, of violating 
Penal Code section 273a, subdivision (b), (child endangerment or cruelty under 
circumstances or conditions other than those likely to produce great bodily harm or 
death), a misdemeanor. The conduct underlying the conviction occurred in July 2021, 
when respondent punched his child, who was also a District student, in the face. 
In February 2022, the California Commission on Teacher Credentialing (CTC) 
suspended respondent’s teaching credential. In March 2022, the District placed 
respondent on unpaid administrative leave based on his suspended credential. After 
respondent’s appeal, the CTC upheld his suspension for 180 days, effective January 15 
through July 13, 2023.
Analysis 
Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b), lists causes for immediate 
suspension without pay of permanent employees, including, as relevant here, “immoral 5conduct” and “conviction of a felony or of any crime involving moral turpitude.” When 
evaluating a motion to reverse the suspension, review is limited to “a determination as 
to whether the facts as alleged in the [SOC], if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis 
for immediate suspension under this section.” (Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(1).) Here, as 
explained below, the facts alleged in the SOC, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis 
to suspend respondent for immoral conduct but not for conviction of a crime involving 
moral turpitude. 
IMMORAL CONDUCT
As used in the Education Code, the term “immoral conduct” must be construed 
“according to [its] common and approved usage having regard for the context in 
which the legislature used” the term. (
(1970) 9 Cal.App.3d 967, 971.) In 
 (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811 ( ), the court 
held: 
The term "immoral" has been defined generally as that 
which is hostile to the welfare of the general public and 
contrary to good morals. Immorality has not been confined 
to sexual matters, but includes conduct inconsistent with 
rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, 
dissoluteness; or as wilful, flagrant, or shameless conduct 
showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable 
members of the community, and as an inconsiderate 
attitude toward good order and the public welfare.6Here, the District alleged in the SOC that respondent engaged in a pattern of 
inappropriate conduct towards students and staff over multiple years despite several 
warnings. In March 2021, he criticized school administrators as racist for hiring a non-
white woman into the Math Department. His students overheard his comments and 
were upset. Respondent then denied making such comments. Those facts do not 
constitute immoral conduct as defined in .
However, the District also alleged in the SOC that in July 2021, respondent 
punched his child, who was also a student in the District, in the face. Such conduct 
constitutes immoral conduct as defined in . Consequently, those facts alleged 
in the SOC, if true, constitute immoral conduct and form a basis to suspend 
respondent.
CONVICTION OF A CRIME INVOLVING MORAL TURPITUDE
The California Supreme Court has defined moral turpitude as “an act of 
baseness, vileness or depravity in the private and social duties which a man owns to 
his fellowmen, or to society in general, contrary to the accepted and customary rule of 
right and duty between man and man.” (  (1938) 12 Cal.2d 93, 97; 
(1979) 98 Cal.App.3d 167, 184.) Moral turpitude has also been defined as a general 
readiness to do evil. (  (1985) 38 Cal. 3d 301, 314.) To determine 
whether a crime involves moral turpitude, one must evaluate the crime’s elements. 
Respondent was convicted of violating Penal Code section 273a, subdivision (b), 
which provides, 
Any person who, under circumstances or conditions other 
than those likely to produce great bodily harm or death, 
willfully causes or permits any child to suffer, or inflicts 7thereon unjustifiable physical pain or mental suffering, or 
having the care or custody of any child, willfully causes or 
permits the person or health of that child to be injured, or 
willfully causes or permits that child to be placed in a 
situation where his or her person or health may be 
endangered, is guilty of a misdemeanor.
Respondent did not argue Penal Code section 273a, subdivision (b), is not a 
crime involving moral turpitude. The District argued it does involve moral turpitude, 
citing to  (2009) 180 Cal.App.4th 447, 461 ( ). However, 
held a different statute, Penal Code section 273.5, is a crime involving moral turpitude. 
(.) did not address whether section 273a, subdivision (b), is a crime 
involving moral turpitude. It appears there is no caselaw on whether a conviction for 
misdemeanor child cruelty or endangerment, under Penal Code section 273a, 
subdivision (b), is a crime of moral turpitude.
However, in the context of using a prior conviction to impeach a witness, the 
Fifth District Court of Appeal held felony child endangerment is not necessarily a crime 
of moral turpitude. ( (1992) 10 Cal.App.4th 1268, 1274-1275.) Felony 
child cruelty or endangerment occurs “under circumstances or conditions likely to 
produce great bodily harm or death” (Pen. Code, § 273a, subd. (a)), whereas 
misdemeanor child cruelty or endangerment occurs “under circumstances 
 likely to produce great bodily harm or death” (Pen. Code, § 273a, subd. (a) 
(emphasis added)). If felony child endangerment is not a crime of moral turpitude as a 
matter of law, then it follows a misdemeanor offense is also not a crime of moral 
turpitude as a matter of law. Therefore, based on the facts as alleged in the SOC, 8respondent’s conviction does not constitute a basis to suspend him under Education 
Code section 44939, subdivision (b).
RESPONDENT ’S ADDITIONAL ARGUMENTS
Each of respondent’s additional arguments in his Motion have been considered 
and rejected.
ORDER
GOOD CAUSE NOT HAVING BEEN ESTABLISHED, the Motion for Immediate 
Reversal of Suspension is DENIED.
DATE: February 12, 2024
SEAN GAVIN
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings