BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 
Suspension of: 
JOSE CERVANTES, a Permanent Certificated Employee, 
Moving Party, 
and 
LOS ANGELES UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, 
Responding Party. 
OAH No. 2024050410 
ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 
SUSPENSION 
Ji-Lan Zang, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings (OAH), 
State of California, heard this matter by videoconference on May 24, 2024. 
Shirley Lee, Attorney at Law, represented moving party Jose Cervantes 
(Employee). 
M. Cristina Cruz, Attorney at Law, represented responding party Los Angeles 
Unified School District (District). 2District has suspended Employee without pay pending the outcome of its action 
to dismiss Employee. The basis for the suspension under Education Code section 
44939 is immoral conduct. In his motion (Motion), Employee seeks an order for the 
immediate reversal of his suspension. District opposes the Motion. 
Counsel for both parties presented oral argument at the motion hearing. The 
parties did not dispute that the Statement of Charges, attached as Exhibit A to the 
Motion, is the operative pleading for this proceeding. 
Motion for Immediate Reversal of Suspension
A school district may immediately suspend without pay a permanent certificated 
employee charged with immoral conduct. (Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (b).) A suspended 
employee may file a motion for immediate reversal of the suspension with OAH. (Ed. 
Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(1).) An administrative judge’s review of the suspended 
employee’s motion shall be “limited to a determination as to whether the facts as 
alleged in the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for 
immediate suspension under this section.” (Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(1).) 
Although the administrative law judge must accept well-pleaded facts in the 
statement of charges as true, the administrative law judge need not accept 
contentions, deductions, or conclusions of fact or law. ( (1985) 39 Cal.3d 
311, 318.) Conclusory characterizations of conduct as intentional, willful, or fraudulent 
are “patently insufficient.” ( (1977) 73 Cal.App.3d 864, 872.) Where 
reading the allegations reveals the existence of an affirmative defense, the 
complaining party must plead around the defense by alleging specific facts that would 
avoid the apparent defense. (  39 Cal.3d at p. 318.) 3Statement of Charges
During the relevant period, Employee was employed by District as a secondary 
counselor at Chatsworth Charter High School. The Statement of Charges alleges 
Employee engaged in immoral conduct in violation of Education Code sections 44932, 
subdivision (a)(1), and 44939, committed unprofessional conduct in violation of section 
Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(2), and his unfitness for service is 
evident under Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(6).
In support of its charge of immoral conduct, District alleges Employee 
committed conduct “constituting grooming or was indicative of a person attempting 
or intending to groom a minor” in relation to three students, S  P., K  F., 
and I  M. (Statement of Charges, ¶¶ 2, 4, & 6.) 
With respect to S  P., Employee allegedly, during a counseling session on 
or about March 18, 2022, referred to her as “Mami,” “Mi Amor” (my love), and “Carina.”
Employee allegedly closed his office door, tried to hold S  P.’s hand, asked her 
about her personal life, and told her she could confide in him. The Statement of 
Charges also alleges Employee said to S  P. words to the effect of: “You have 
pretty eyes and a pretty body”; “I’m sure a lot of guys want you for that”; “I can give 
you a free pass to dismiss you from class and you could come to see me anytime”; “I 
want to get to know you better”; “You’re a pretty girl”; “Do you smoke?”; “You have 
pretty eyes and are very pretty”; and “We could be girlfriend and boyfriend from afar 
as long as you could be discrete.” 
With respect to K  F., during a period from August 15, 2022, to August 
26, 2022, Employee allegedly saw K  F. on three separate occasions. During at 
least one of these occasions, Employee allegedly referred to her as “Mami” and “Mi 
4Amor.” The Statement of Charges also alleges Employee failed to change K  F.’s
English class per her request, kept her alone in his office for an extended period, 
touched her on the shoulder, and pulled his chair closer to her while K  F. was 
seated. Employee allegedly also said to K  F., words to the effect of: “You can 
share your problems with me”; “I am going to tell you about me”; “You are going to 
tell me things you like”’ and “I’ll tell you things I like.” 
With respect to I  M., during a period from August 15, 2022, to August 26, 
2022, Employee allegedly saw I  M. on two separate occasions. During at least one 
of these occasions, Employee allegedly referred to her as “Mami” and “Mi Amor.” The 
Statement of Charges also alleges Employee was alone with I  M. and directed her 
to stand next to him while he showed her schedule on his computer. Employee 
allegedly also said to I  M., words to the effect of: “I’ll change your class if you 
smile”; and “You can talk to me about your problems.” 
District contends the foregoing conduct warrants Employee’s immediate 
dismissal without pay. Employee contends District failed to plead sufficient facts to 
establish immoral conduct. According to Employee, District’s claims of immoral 
conduct are conclusory, and District failed to prove any context of the alleged 
incidents. Specifically, Employee contends a counselor being alone with a student in 
his office is not uncommon, and none of the acts alleged in the Statement of Charges 
rises to the level of immoral conduct. Immoral Conduct 
“[T]he term ‘immoral conduct’ in [Education Code] section 44932, subdivision 
(a)(1) ‘stretch[es] over so wide a range’ of conduct that it ‘embrace[s] an unlimited area 
of conduct.’” (  (2020) 53 
5Cal.App.5th 327, 337, quoting (1969) 1 Cal.3d 
214, 224-225.) Courts have defined immoral conduct in school settings as conduct 
“‘hostile to the welfare of the general public and contrary to good morals. Immorality 
has not been confined to sexual matters, but includes conduct inconsistent with 
rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; or as wil[l]ful, 
flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral indifference to the opinions of 
respectable members of the community, and as an inconsiderate attitude toward good 
order and the public welfare.’” ((1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811, quoting (1951) 
36 Cal.2d 734, 740.)
Immoral conduct also “must be considered in conjunction with the unique 
position of public school teachers, upon whom are imposed ‘responsibilities and 
limitations on freedom of action which do not exist in regard to other callings.’ ” (
(2011) 194 
Cal.App.4th 1454, 1466.) “Thus, the term must be ‘considered in the context in which 
the Legislature considered it, as conduct which is hostile to the welfare of the general 
public . . . more specifically in this case, conduct which is hostile to the welfare of the 
school community.’” ( , , 53 Cal.App.5th at p. 337, quoting , 
, 1 Cal.3d at p. 224.)
Disposition 
Some of Employee’s alleged misconduct in his actions towards S  P., if 
true, are sufficient to sustain Employee’s immediate suspension based on immoral 
conduct. Specifically, these allegations including Employee saying to her words to the 
effect of: “You have pretty eyes and a pretty body”; “I’m sure a lot of guys want you for 
that”; “You’re a pretty girl”; “You have pretty eyes and are very pretty”; and “We could 
6be girlfriend and boyfriend from afar as long as you could be discrete.” Respondent’s 
comments about S  P.’s physical appearance, men’s desire for her physical 
attributes, and his suggestion that they become boyfriend and girlfriend constitute
sexual advances. They are offensive, indecent, and depraved acts that show flagrant or 
shameless indifference to community standards and/or are hostile to the students at
Employee’s school. Although respondent’s alleged actions towards K  F. and 
I  M., when viewed in isolation, may seem more innocuous, they constitute a 
pattern of sexual grooming that rises to immoral conduct when viewed in the context 
of all three students’ allegations against respondent.
All arguments made by counsel in their briefs and at oral argument have been 
considered. The facts pleaded in the Statement of Charges, if true, are sufficient to 
support a claim against Employee for immoral conduct and therefore form a basis for 
immediate suspension without pay under Education Code section 44939, subdivision 
(c)(1). Accordingly, the Motion for Immediate Reversal of Suspension is denied.ORDER
The motion by Jose Cervantes for immediate reversal of his suspension without 
pay is denied.
DATE:
JI-LAN ZANG
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings
