BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 
Suspension of: 
BRON HANTZIS, a Permanent Certificated Employee, Moving 
Party 
and 
SAN MATEO-FOSTER CITY SCHOOL DISTRICT, 
Responding Party 
OAH Case No. 2024051116 
ORDER GRANTING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 
SUSPENSION 
On June 14, 2024, Wim van Rooyen, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ), Office of 
Administrative Hearings (OAH), State of California, heard oral argument by 
videoconference on the instant motion for immediate reversal of suspension. 
Holly Latz, Attorney at Law, Beeson, Tayer & Bodine, APC, represented the 
moving party, Bron Hantzis (Hantzis). 2 Georgelle Cuevas, Attorney at Law, Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Ruud & Romo, 
APC, represented the responding party San Mateo-Foster City School District (District). 
On June 14, 2024, the motion was submitted for decision. 
Procedural Background
On March 29, 2024, Diana L. Tavares, in her official capacity as the District’s
Assistant Superintendent for Human Resources, signed and later filed with the 
District’s Governing Board a “Statement of Charges that There Exists Cause to 
Immediately Suspend Without Pay and to Dismiss a Permanent Certificated Employee” 
(Statement of Charges). 
The Statement of Charges states the following charges against Hantzis, a 
permanent certificated employee: evident unfitness for service (Ed. Code, § 44932, 
subd. (a)(6)) and persistent violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of the state 
or reasonable regulations prescribed for the government of the public schools by the 
state board or by the governing board of the school district employing him ( , subd. 
(a)(8)). Specifically, the Statement of Charges alleges that Hantzis engaged in bullying, 
harassing, and/or retaliatory behavior towards students, imposed improper and overly 
harsh discipline, gave inappropriate assignments, disclosed confidential student 
information, violated the principal’s direction not to have contact with a particular 
student, threatened to physically remove a student, and created an uncomfortable and 
hostile working environment for other employees.
On April 25, 2024, the District’s Governing Board passed and adopted a 
resolution of intent to immediately suspend without pay and dismiss Hantzis. On April 
27, 2024, the District served Hantzis with a notice of immediate suspension without 3 pay, pending a dismissal hearing before a Commission on Professional Competence 
(CPC). 
On May 24, 2024, Hantzis filed a motion for immediate reversal of suspension 
pursuant to Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c), on grounds that the 
Statement of Charges does not set forth a sufficient basis for an immediate unpaid 
suspension. On June 4, 2024, the District filed its opposition to the motion. On June 
11, 2024, Hantzis filed a reply brief. 
Analysis
Education Code section 44939 states, in relevant part, that a school district may 
immediately suspend without pay a permanent employee of the school district who 
has been charged “with immoral conduct, conviction of a felony or of any crime 
involving moral turpitude, with incompetency due to mental disability, with willful 
refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by 
reasonable rules and regulations of the employing school district, or with violation 
of Section 51530. . . .” (Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (b).)
An employee who has been placed on such suspension may file a motion for 
immediate reversal of suspension. (Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(1).) “Review of a 
motion filed pursuant to this section shall be limited to a determination as to whether 
the facts as alleged in the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a 
basis for immediate suspension under this section.” ( .) “The grant or denial of the 
motion shall be without prejudice to consideration by the [CPC], based upon the full 
evidentiary record before it, of the validity of the grounds for dismissal. The ruling shall 
not be considered by the [CPC] in determining the validity of the grounds for 4 dismissal, and shall not have any bearing on the [CPC’s] determination regarding the 
grounds for dismissal.” (Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(4).)
Here, the District does not contend that it has sufficiently alleged immoral 
conduct, conviction of a felony or of any crime involving moral turpitude, 
incompetency due to mental disability, or a violation of Education Code section 51530. 
The District argues that Hantzis’s immediate unpaid suspension is supported solely by 
his alleged “willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, as 
prescribed by reasonable rules and regulations of the employing school district.” 
However, even liberally construed, the Statement of Charges does not allege a 
willful refusal to perform regular assignments. There is no allegation that Hantzis 
refused to teach his fourth grade class, attend faculty meetings, or perform other 
regular duties. Instead, the Statement of Charges targets the  in which Hantzis 
performed his regular assignments. It primarily alleges that Hantzis violated several 
District policies and/or principal’s directives in his interactions with students and staff 
in the course of his regular duties as a teacher. 
If those serious allegations are true, a CPC may ultimately find cause to dismiss 
Hantzis for evident unfitness for service under Education Code section 44932, 
subdivision (a)(6), and/or persistent violation of or refusal to obey school laws and 
regulations under Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(8). However, those 
charges cannot support an immediate unpaid suspension, which must be based on 
one or more of the specific grounds outlined in Education Code section 44939. 
In sum, the District has pled insufficient facts to support Hantzis’s immediate 
unpaid suspension. Accordingly, the motion must be granted. 5 ORDER
The Motion for Immediate Reversal of Suspension is GRANTED. Hantzis’s 
immediate suspension without pay is REVERSED. The District shall immediately return 
Hantzis to paid status. The District shall make Hantzis whole for any lost wages, 
benefits, and compensation within 14 days after service of this Order.
DATE: June 18, 2024 WIM VAN ROOYEN
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings
