BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 
Suspension of: 
KELLI WYBRANT, 
a Permanent Certificated Employee, 
Moving Party, 
v. 
COVINA-VALLEY UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, 
Responding Party. 
OAH No. 2024120597 
ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR 
IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF SUSPENSION 
(Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(4)) 
Administrative Law Judge Michael C. Starkey, State of California, Office of 
Administrative Hearings, heard this matter on January 10, 2025, by videoconference. 2 Attorney Carlos R. Perez represented moving party Kelli Wybrant. 
Attorneys Paul Z. McGlocklin and Michele L. Baumberger represented 
responding party the Covina-Valley Unified School District (District). 
Procedural History
On November 14, 2024, the District issued a statement of charges against 
moving party Wybrant, alleging multiple causes for dismissal, including immoral 
conduct pursuant to Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(1). The District 
placed Wybrant on immediate suspension without pay pending hearing, pursuant to 
Education Code section 44939, based upon the charge of immoral conduct. The 
statement of charges and notice of suspension was served upon Wybrant on 
November 19, 2024. 
On December 17, 2024, Wybrant timely filed a motion for immediate reversal of 
her suspension without pay pursuant to Education Code section 44939, subdivision 
(c)(4), arguing that the District has not alleged a sufficient basis to place her on 
immediate unpaid status because the allegations in the statement of charges do not 
state sufficient facts to constitute immoral conduct. In her motion, Wybrant requests 
an order reversing her suspension without pay.
Discussion 
Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b), provides, in relevant part, that a 
school district may immediately suspend a permanent employee of the school district 
who has been charged “with immoral conduct, conviction of a felony or of any crime 
involving moral turpitude, with incompetency due to mental disability, with willful 
refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by 3 reasonable rules and regulations of the employing school district, or with violation of 
Section 51530 . . . .”
Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), authorizes the permanent 
employee to seek review of the order of suspension by motion to the Office of 
Administrative Hearings. This section limits the review of a motion to immediately 
reverse a suspension to “a determination as to whether the facts as alleged in the 
statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate 
suspension under this section.”
The written submissions of the parties and their oral argument have been 
considered. Based upon a review of the charges, the District has alleged facts which, if 
true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension under Education 
Code section 44939, subdivision (b), on the grounds of immoral conduct.
ORDER
The motion for immediate reversal of the suspension of Kelli Wybrant by 
Covina-Valley Unified School District is denied.
DATE:
MICHAEL C. STARKEY
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings
