BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 
Suspension of: 
BRUCE FARNSWORTH, a Permanent Certificated Employee, 
Moving Party, 
and 
FAIRFIELD-SUISUN UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, 
Responding Party. 
OAH No. 2024100682 
ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR 
IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF SUSPENSION 
(Ed. Code, ยง 44939, subd. (c)(4)) 
Administrative Law Judge Holly M. Baldwin, State of California, Office of 
Administrative Hearings, heard this matter on November 15, 2024, by videoconference. 
Attorney Joshua Richtel appeared for moving party Bruce Farnsworth. 
Attorney Marleen Sacks appeared for responding party Fairfield-Suisun Unified 
School District (District). 2 Procedural History 
On September 19, 2024, the District issued a statement of charges against 
moving party Bruce Farnsworth, alleging multiple causes for dismissal, including 
immoral conduct and persistent violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of the 
state or reasonable regulations prescribed for the government of the public schools. 
(Ed. Code, ยง 44932, subd. (a)(1) & (a)(8).) The District placed Farnsworth on immediate 
suspension without pay pending hearing, pursuant to Education Code section 44939, 
based upon the charges of immoral conduct, and also upon an allegation that the 
alleged conduct constitutes willful refusal to perform regular assignments without 
reasonable cause, as prescribed by the reasonable rules and regulations of the 
employing school district. 
On October 18, 2024, Farnsworth timely filed a motion for immediate reversal of 
his suspension without pay, pursuant to Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c). 
The District opposes the motion. 
Discussion 
Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b), provides, in relevant part, that a 
school district may immediately suspend a permanent employee of the school district 
involving moral turpitude, with incompetency due to mental disability, with willful 
refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by 
reasonable rules and regulations of the employing school district, or with violation of 
[Education Code] Section 51530  
Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), authorizes the permanent 
employee to seek review of the order of suspension by motion to the Office of 3 Administrative Hearings. This section limits the review of a motion to immediately 
the 
statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate 
) 
rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; or as willful, 
flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral indifference to the opinions of 
 (1960) 197 
Cal.App.2d 808, 811; see also  
(2020) 53 Cal.App.5th 327, 337.) 
Farnsworth taught photography to seventh through twelfth grade students. The 
statement of charges alleges, among other things, that Farnsworth lied on his job 
application about the circumstances of his separation from prior employment; used 
sexually inappropriate language about a 14-year-old girl that was recorded via a 
speech-to-text function on his phone and mistakenly included in 
assignment displayed to his students; lied repeatedly to students, administrators, and 
an investigator when questioned about how that language came to appear in the 
assignment; attempted to blame a student after Farnsworth negligently allowed that 
studen ; and lied about the quantity of 
pornography on the phone. The statement of charges also includes allegations that 
after previously being directed not to touch students, lean in toward them, or stare at 
uncomfortable, and that this constituted insubordination. 4The District contends that the factual allegations in the statement of charges 
constitute immoral conduct. The District also contends that the allegations in the 
statement of charges that Farnsworth violated school policies and regulations 
constitute willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause,
sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension.
The written submissions of the parties and their oral argument have been 
considered. Based upon a review of the charges, the District has alleged facts which, if 
true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension under Education 
Code section 44939, subdivision (b), on the grounds of immoral conduct.
Whether the allegations are sufficient to constitute willful refusal to perform 
regular assignments without reasonable cause need not be resolved in this order, 
because the allegations of immoral conduct are sufficient to sustain the immediate 
suspension.
ORDER
Fairfield-Suisun Unified School District is denied.
DATE:
HOLLY M. BALDWIN
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings
