BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 
Suspension of: 
CHRISTOPHER BRABANT, a Permanent Certificated 
Employee, Moving Party, 
and 
SALINAS UNION HIGH SCHOOL DISTRICT, Responding Party. 
OAH No. 2024070160 
ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR 
IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF SUSPENSION 
(Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(4)) 
Administrative Law Judge Holly M. Baldwin, State of California, Office of 
Administrative Hearings, heard this matter on July 26, 2024, by videoconference. 
Attorney Melissa Yoest represented moving party Christopher Brabant. 
Attorneys Gabriela D. Flowers and Selina Ayala-Patlán represented responding 
party Salinas Union High School District (District). 2 Procedural History 
On June 25, 2024, the District filed a statement of charges against moving party 
Christopher Brabant,1 alleging multiple causes for dismissal, including immoral 
conduct. The District placed Brabant on immediate suspension without pay pending 
hearing, pursuant to Education Code section 44939, based upon the charges of 
immoral conduct. 
On July 3, 2024, Brabant timely filed a motion for immediate reversal of his 
suspension without pay, pursuant to Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c). 
Brabant requests an order reversing his suspension without pay. 
Discussion 
Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b), provides, in relevant part, that a 
school district may immediately suspend a permanent employee of the school district 
involving moral turpitude, with incompetency due to mental disability, with willful 
refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by 
reasonable rules and regulations of the employing school district, or with violation of 
[Educatio  
Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), authorizes the permanent 
employee to seek review of the order of suspension by motion to the Office of 
Administrative Hearings. This section limits the review of a motion to immediately 
reverse a suspension 
 
1 The statement of charges was served on Brabant on June 26, 2024. 3statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate 
()
The written submissions of the parties and their oral argument have been 
considered. Based upon a review of the charges, the District has alleged facts which, if 
true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension under Education 
Code section 44939, subdivision (b), on the grounds of immoral conduct.
ORDER
motion for immediate reversal of the suspension by 
Salinas Union High School District is denied.
DATE:
HOLLY M. BALDWIN
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings
