BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINSTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 
Suspension of: 
ALISON ARMAND, a Permanent Certificated Employee, 
Moving Party 
and  
WEST CONTRA COSTA UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT,  
Responding Party 
OAH No. 2024080859 
ORDER GRANTING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 
SUSPENSION 
Administrative Law Judge Deena R. Ghaly, Office of Administrative Hearings 
(OAH), State of California, heard this matter videoconference on September 13, 2024. 
Attorney Joshua F. Richtel, Tuttle & McCloskey, represented moving party 
Alison Armand (respondent). Attorney Alex A. Lozada, Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Ruud 
& Roma, represented responding party West Contra Costa Unified School District 
(District). 2 The matter was submitted for decision on September 13, 2024. 
BACKGROUND 
 Respondent is a permanent certificated employee of the District, assigned to 
teach special education at Balboa Children's Center. On July 24, 2024, the District 
issued a Statement of Charges and Notice of Immediate Suspension Without 
Pay/Dismissal (SOC). The SOC charges respondent with immoral conduct as defined in 
Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(1). On July 25, 2024, respondent served 
a demand for hearing on the dismissal and filed a motion for immediate reversal of 
the suspension (MIRS) under Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1). The 
District filed an opposition to the MIRS, and counsel for both parties presented oral 
argument at the motion hearing. 
The charges are based on the following alleged facts: On May 2, 2023, a student, 
GR, in respondent's second-grade classroom became disruptive and aggressive, 
throwing a small object, running around the classroom and twice lunging at another 
student, first grabbing her by the neck and pulling her down to the carpeted floor and 
then, in a second effort, knocking her down again. Respondent's assistant dragged GR 
away from the other students. Respondent then used an "improper emergency 
intervention restraint" to subdue GR. Specifically, respondent lifted GR from a small 
couch where the assistant had placed him, laid him face down on the floor face down 
and held him down against the floor. GR struggled initially but, as shown in a 
surveillance video, stopped doing so. Nonetheless, respondent continued to hold him 
down for four to five minutes after he stopped struggling.  3   
Respondent asserts the , even if true, are insufficient to 
constitute the only basis for immediate suspension without pay alleged against her, 
immoral conduct. Specifically, respondent contends the factual allegations may raise 
some grounds for dismissal but not immoral conduct.  
 
The District asserts that the SOC alleges sufficient facts constituting immoral 
conduct and respondent's immediate suspension is necessary because her conduct 
constituted an unnecessary and dangerous overreaction to the misbehavior of a six-
year-old boy with special needs.  
     LEGAL STANDARDS 
General Provisions 
A school district may immediately suspend without pay a permanent certificated 
employee who has been charged with "immoral conduct, conviction of a felony or of 
any crime involving moral turpitude, with incompetency due to mental disability, with 
[willful refusal]  or with advocating communism. (Ed. Code, ยง 44939, subd. (b).)  
Suspended teachers may file a MIRS with OAH. (Ed. Code, ยง 44939, subd. (c)(1).) 
determination as to whether the facts as alleged in the statement of charges, if true, 
)  4 Immoral Conduct 
Immoral conduct is conduct which is: 
[H]ostile to the welfare of the general public and contrary 
to good morals. Immorality has not been confined to sexual 
matters, but includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or 
indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; 
or as willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral 
indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the 
community, and as an inconsiderate attitude toward good 
o  
(  (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811, quoting 
 (1951) 36 Cal.2d 734, 740.) 
In  (1969) 1 Cal. 3d 214, the California 
Supreme Court set out factors (  factors) to be considered in determining what 
constitutes immoral conduct for purposes of deciding whether sufficient grounds exist 
to warrant a teacher's dismissal. The  court held consideration of these factors 
good faith, professional judgment in the course of their employment with which 
. at p. 233.)  
The  factors are: (i) the likelihood the conduct adversely effected 
students, fellow teachers or the educational community; (ii) proximity or remoteness in 
time of the conduct; (iii) the type of credential held by the person involved; (iv) 
extenuating or aggravating circumstances; (v) praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of 
the motives resulting in the conduct; (vi) the likelihood of the recurrence of the 5 questioned conduct; (vii) the extent to which disciplinary action may inflict an adverse 
impact or chilling effect on the constitutional rights of the person involved, or other 
certified persons; and (viii) the publicity or notoriety given to the conduct. ( , 
, 1 Cal.3d at p. 229.) 
Here, respondent, who was responsible for the welfare of all students in her 
class, reacted - and possibly overreacted- under the pressures of the immediate 
situation. Based on the limited information provided in the SOC, it is not immediately 
apparent that her actions can be characterized as corrupt, indecent, depraved, 
shameless, and the like. As such, they do not evince immoral conduct.  
The charges as set out in the SOC provide even less material to establish immoral 
conduct when analyzed under the Morrison factors, which are necessarily very fact and 
circumstance specific. Careful review of the facts, as will be more readily possible 
through development of evidence at hearing, will be necessary to determine whether 
respondent's actions reach the level of misconduct to support the charges in the SOC, 
including immoral conduct.  
Based on the f
comply with Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(5), which provides that an 
order granting a MIRS "shall become effective within five days of service of the order. 
The school district shall make the employee whole for any lost wages, benefits, and 
 
  ORDER 
Good cause having been established, respondent Alison Armand's motion for 
immediate reversal of suspension is granted. The District shall make respondent whole 6 for any lost wages, benefits, and compensation pursuant to Education Code section 
44939, subdivision (c)(5).  
 
DATE:  
DEENA R. GHALY 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings
 