BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 
Suspension of: 
DANIEL DE LA CRUZ, a Permanent Certificated Employee, 
Moving Party, 
and 
CALAVERAS UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, Responding Party. 
OAH No. 2024070211 
ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR 
IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF SUSPENSION 
(Ed. Code, ยง 44939, subd. (c)(4)) 
Administrative Law Judge Holly M. Baldwin, State of California, Office of 
Administrative Hearings, heard this matter on July 26, 2024, by videoconference. 
Attorney Eric Lindstrom represented moving party Daniel De La Cruz. 
Attorneys Gabriela D. Flowers and Sinead M. McDonough represented 
responding party Calaveras Unified School District (District). 2 Procedural History 
On June 25, 2024, the District filed a statement of charges against moving party 
Daniel De La Cruz,1 alleging multiple causes for dismissal, including immoral conduct. 
The District placed De La Cruz on immediate suspension without pay pending hearing, 
pursuant to Education Code section 44939, based on the charges of immoral conduct. 
On June 27, 2024, De La Cruz timely filed a motion for immediate reversal of his 
suspension without pay, pursuant to Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c), 
arguing that the District has not alleged a sufficient cause to put him on immediate 
unpaid status because the allegations in the statement of charges do not state 
sufficient facts to constitute immoral conduct. De La Cruz requests an order reversing 
his suspension without pay. 
Discussion 
Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b), provides, in relevant part, that a 
school district may immediately suspend a permanent employee of the school district 
involving moral turpitude, with incompetency due to mental disability, with willful 
refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by 
reasonable rules and regulations of the employing school district, or with violation of 
 
Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), authorizes the permanent 
employee to seek review of the order of suspension by motion to the Office of 
 
1 The statement of charges was served on De La Cruz on June 26, 2024. 3Administrative Hearings. This section limits the review of a motion to immediately 
statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate 
()
The written submissions of the parties and their oral argument have been 
considered. Based upon a review of the charges, the District has alleged facts which, if 
true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension under Education 
Code section 44939, subdivision (b), on the grounds of immoral conduct.
ORDER
motion for immediate reversal of the suspension by 
Calaveras Unified School District is denied.
DATE:
HOLLY M. BALDWIN
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings
