BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 
Suspension of: 
KAREN EHRHARDT, a Permanent Certificated Employee, 
Moving Party, 
and 
MONTEREY PENINSULA UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, 
Responding Party. 
OAH No. 2024050362 
ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 
SUSPENSION 
(Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(4)) 
Administrative Law Judge Michelle Dylan, State of California, Office of 
Administrative Hearings, heard this matter on May 31, 2024, by videoconference.
Joseph Cisneros, Attorney at Law, Biegel Law Firm, represented moving party 
Karen Ehrhardt. 2Ricardo Rodriguez, Attorney at Law, Lozano Smith, represented responding 
party Monterey Peninsula Unified School District (District). 
PROCEDURAL HISTORY 
On April 9, 2024, the District filed a statement of charges against moving party 
Ehrhardt1pursuant to Education Code section 44932, alleging three causes for 
dismissal: 1) immoral conduct; 2) unprofessional conduct; and 3) evident unfitness for 
service. The District placed Ehrhardt on immediate suspension without pay pursuant to 
Education Code section 44939, based upon the charge of immoral conduct.
On May 9, 2024, Ehrhardt filed a timely motion for immediate reversal of her 
suspension without pay, pursuant to Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1). 
She argues that the District has not alleged a sufficient basis to place her on 
immediate unpaid status because the allegations in the statement of charges do not 
state sufficient facts to constitute immoral conduct. In her motion, Ehrhardt requests 
an order reinstating her pay and benefits and reimbursing her for lost compensation 
from the date of suspension through the present, with interest. 
DISCUSSION 
Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b), provides, in relevant part, that a 
school district may immediately suspend a permanent employee of the school district 
who has been charged “with immoral conduct, conviction of a felony or of any crime 
 
1 The statement of charges was served on Ehrhardt on April 11, 2024. 3involving moral turpitude, with incompetency due to mental disability, with willful 
refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by 
reasonable rules and regulations of the employing school district, or with violation of 
(Education Code) section 51530.” 
Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), authorizes the permanent 
employee to seek review of the order of suspension by motion to the Office of 
Administrative Hearings. This section limits the review of a motion to immediately 
reverse a suspension to “a determination as to whether the facts as alleged in the 
statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate 
suspension under this section.” Although well-pleaded facts must be accepted as true 
for purposes of this motion, the administrative law judge need not accept 
“contentions, deductions or conclusions of fact or law.” ( (1985) 39 
Cal.3d 311, 318.)
The written submissions of the parties and their oral argument have been 
considered. Based upon a review of the charges, the District has alleged facts which, if 
true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension under Education 
Code section 44939, subdivision (b), on the grounds of immoral conduct.
 
 4ORDER
The motion for immediate reversal of the suspension of Karen Ehrhardt by
Monterey Peninsula School District is denied.
DATE:
MICHELLE DYLAN
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings
