BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 
Suspension Filed by: 
MICHAEL COHEN, Moving Party, 
v. 
LOS ANGELES UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, Responding Party 
OAH No. 2024091069 
ORDER GRANTING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 
SUSPENSION 
(Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(4)) 
Administrative Law Judge Karen Reichmann, State of California, Office of 
Administrative Hearings, heard this matter by videoconference on October 18, 2024. 
Attorney Jason Wojciechowski represented Michael Cohen, the moving party.
M. Cristina Cruz, Assistant General Counsel I, Office of the General Counsel, 
represented the Los Angeles Unified School District (District).2 PROCEDURAL HISTORY
A statement of charges was filed and served against Michael Cohen, pursuant to 
Education Code section 44932, alleging a total of five causes for dismissal, including 
immoral conduct and willful refusal to perform regular assignments without 
reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and regulations of the School 
District (willful refusal). The District placed Cohen on immediate suspension without 
pay, pursuant to Education Code section 44939, based upon the allegations of 
immoral conduct and willful refusal.   
Cohen filed a timely motion for immediate reversal of his suspension without 
pay, pursuant to Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1). He argues that the 
District has not alleged a sufficient basis to place him on immediate unpaid status 
because the factual allegations in the statement of charges do not establish that he 
engaged in immoral conduct or willful refusal. The District opposes the motion. 
DISCUSSION 
Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b), provides that a school district 
may immediately suspend a permanent certificated employee who has been charged 
“with immoral conduct, conviction of a felony or of any crime involving moral 
turpitude, with incompetency due to mental disability, with willful refusal to perform 
regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and 
regulations of the School District, or with violation of [Education Code] section 51530.” 
Immoral conduct is defined as conduct that is “hostile to the welfare of the 
general public and contrary to good morals” and includes conduct “inconsistent with 
rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; or as willful, 
flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral indifference to the opinions of 3 respectable members of the community.” ( (1960) 197 
Cal.App.2d 808, 811.) 
Pursuant to Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), “review of a 
motion filed pursuant to this section shall be limited to a determination as to whether 
the facts as alleged in the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a 
basis for immediate suspension under this section.” 
Cohen was employed as an English teacher at a high school for pregnant and 
parenting students. The statement of charges alleges that between August 2020 and 
October 2022, Cohen engaged in misconduct including: allowing a student to remain 
in his classroom while she skipped other classes; making statements about students’ 
bodies to students and others; making shaming statements to a student about her 
weight; making a disparaging statement to a student about her cleavage; discussing 
personal information with students; asking a student for hugs and holding her hand 
when she had panic attacks; sharing confidential information about students with 
other students; giving a gift (a baking tray) to a student; and interacting with students 
by phone and text during non-instructional time. 
The District alleges that these actions constitute immoral conduct and willful 
refusal by Cohen to perform regular assignments, as prescribed by rules and 
regulations of the District, in that he violated administrative directives and District 
policies and procedures. 
The written submissions and oral argument of the parties have been considered. 
Based upon a review of the statement of charges, the District has failed to allege facts 
sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension under Education Code section 
44939, subdivision (b), on the grounds of immoral conduct or willful refusal. The facts 4 alleged in the statement of charges may constitute grounds for dismissal pursuant to 
Education Code section 44932, but without further context do not necessarily reflect 
immoral conduct or willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable 
cause. 
ORDER
Michael Cohen’s motion for immediate reversal of suspension is GRANTED. The 
District’s immediate suspension of Michael Cohen is REVERSED. The District shall make 
him whole for any lost wages, benefits, and compensation within 14 days after service 
of this Order. (Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(5).)
DATE:
KAREN REICHMANN
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings
