BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 
Suspension of: 
VJ HIRSCH, Moving Party 
v. 
LOS ANGELES UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, Responding Party 
OAH No. 2024041067 
ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 
SUSPENSION 
Adam L. Berg, Presiding Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative 
Hearings (OAH), State of California, heard oral argument on this matter by Zoom 
videoconference on May 10, 2024.
VJ Hirsch, moving party, appeared on his own behalf. 
Kelly Kim, Associate General Counsel I, represented Los Angeles Unified School 
District. 
The matter was submitted for decision on May 10, 2024. 2On or about March 26, 2024, the district’s Interim Chief Human Resources 
Officer served Mr. Hirsch with a Statement of Charges seeking the immediate 
suspension without pay and dismissal of Mr. Hirsch, a permanent certificated 
employee. The statement of charges alleges the following causes for dismissal: 
immoral conduct; unprofessional conduct; evident unfitness for service; and persistent 
violation of or refusal to obey state school laws or regulations prescribed by the 
district’s governing board. (Ed. Code, §§ 44932, subd. (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(6) & (a)(8).)1The 
district also alleges cause to immediately suspend Mr. Hirsch without pay for immoral 
conduct. (§ 44939, subd. (b).) 
On April 26, 2024, Mr. Hirsch filed a Motion for Immediate Reversal of 
Suspension with OAH, pursuant to Section 44939, subdivision (c)(1). Mr. Hirsch makes 
multiple arguments including: a November 15, 2022, “Unsatisfactory Act and 
Suspension” is awaiting a grievance/appeal, which precludes the district from taking 
action, and the allegations are vague and ambiguous. Mr. Hirsch attached a 
declaration refuting the allegations contained in the Statement of Charges.
The district filed an opposition to the motion on April 30, 2024, arguing that the 
Statement of Charges provides Mr. Hirsch of sufficient notice of the allegations such 
that he can prepare a defense, and the district has sufficiently pled allegations, that if 
true, are sufficient to support suspension without pay for immoral conduct. The district 
also argues that Mr. Hirsch’s motion is untimely under Section 44939, subdivision (c), 
as he failed to file his motion within 30 days of service of the Statement of Charges.
 
1 All further statutory references are to the Education Code. 3On May 1, 2024, Mr. Hirsch filed a supplemental declaration. On May 10, 2024, 
the parties presented additional oral arguments. Following the conclusion of oral 
arguments, Mr. Hirsch was granted leave to file a supplemental declaration, which was 
received later that day. 
Section 44939, subdivision (b), authorizes the district to suspend an employee 
without pay pending the outcome of the hearing based on immoral conduct. 
Subdivision (c)(1) allows the employee to file a motion for relief from the suspension 
and requires review of this motion to be “limited to a determination as to whether the 
facts as alleged in the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis 
for immediate suspension under this section.”
There is broad discretion in determining what constitutes immoral conduct in 
the context of teacher disciplinary matters. (
(1999) 20 Cal.4th 327.) Immoral conduct has been defined by the courts as 
follows:
[T]hat which is hostile to the welfare of the general public 
and contrary to good morals. Immorality has not been 
confined to sexual matters, but includes conduct 
inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, 
indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; or as wilful, flagrant, or 
shameless conduct showing moral indifference to the 
opinions of respectable members of the community, and as 
an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public 
welfare.4( (1970) 9 Cal.App.3d 967, 972, citing 
, 179 Cal. App 2d 808, 811.)
Immoral conduct alone cannot serve as a basis to terminate a teacher unless the 
conduct indicates the teacher is also unfit to teach. ( at p. 972.) The 
definition of immoral or unprofessional conduct must be considered in conjunction 
with the unique position of public school teachers, upon whom are imposed 
“responsibilities and limitations on freedom of action which do not exist in regard to 
other callings.” ( (1971) 16 Cal.App.3d 820, 824.)
In (2020) 53 Cal.App.5th 339, 
337, the court rejected Ms. Crawford’s contention that there are three fixed categories 
of conduct that constitute “immoral conduct” as a matter of law. Instead the court 
held the term “immoral conduct” in Section 44932, “stretch[es] over so wide a range” 
of conduct that it “embrace[s] an unlimited area of conduct.” ( , citing 
(1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 224-225.) Citing at p. 
224, the court added, the term must be “‘considered in the context in which the 
Legislature considered it, as conduct which is hostile to the welfare of the general 
public . . . more specifically in this case,
’”[Citations.] ( at p. 337 [italics in original].) “A teacher's 
conduct is therefore “immoral” under section 44932, subdivision (a)(1), when it 
negatively affects the school community in a way that demonstrates the teacher is 
‘unfit to teach.’” ( [footnote omitted].) The court then addressed Ms. Crawford’s 
argument that the term should be given a colloquial interpretation that includes only 
conduct that would be deemed “immoral” in an everyday sense, such as criminal 
activity and using profanity or racial epithets. ( at p. 338.) The court wrote,  5We disagree. Immoral conduct “stretch[es] over so wide a 
range that [it] embrace[s] an unlimited area of conduct.” 
([ , at pp. 224-225].) Thus, “the proper criteria 
is fitness to teach” because the term “immoral conduct” is 
“so broad and vague” that it is “constitutionally infirm.” 
([Citation].) 
(.)
The parties’ written submissions and oral arguments having been considered, 
the district alleged sufficient facts in the Statement of Charges that, if true, could
constitute immoral conduct and support immediate suspension under section 44939, 
subdivision (b). 
Based on the above conclusion, the district’s argument that Mr. Hirsch’s motion 
was not timely filed need not be addressed. 
The motion for immediate reversal of suspension is DENIED. 
 
DATE: May 16, 2024  
ADAM L. BERG 
Presiding Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings
 