BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 
Suspension of: 
NEWTON OKEWOYE, 
a Permanent Certificated Employee, Moving Party, 
and 
LOS ANGELES UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, Responding Party. 
OAH No. 2024060252 
ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR 
IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF SUSPENSION  
(Ed. Code, ยง 44939, subd. (c)(4)) 
Administrative Law Judge Frances M. Valdez, State of California, Office of 
Administrative Hearings, heard this matter on June 28, 2024, by videoconference. 
Shirley A. Lee, Attorney at Law, Egality Law, LLP, represented moving party 
Newton Okewoye. 2 M. Christina Cruz, Associate General Counsel I, Office of the General Counsel, 
Los Angeles Unified School District, represented responding party Los Angeles Unified 
School District (District). 
Procedural History 
On April 16, 2024, the District filed a statement of charges against moving party 
Okewoye1 pursuant to Education Code section 44932, alleging four causes for 
dismissal: 1) egregious misconduct, 2) unprofessional conduct, 3) immoral conduct, 
and 4) persistent violation of or refusal to obey school laws of the state or regulations 
established by the District or state. The District placed Okewoye on immediate 
suspension without pay pursuant to Education Code section 44939, based upon the 
charges of egregious misconduct and immoral conduct. 
On June 7, 2024, Okewoye timely filed a motion for immediate reversal of his 
suspension without pay, pursuant to Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c). He 
argues that the District has not alleged a sufficient basis to place him on immediate 
unpaid status because the allegations in the statement of charges do not state 
sufficient facts to constitute egregious misconduct or immoral conduct. In his motion, 
Okewoye requests an order reversing the suspension without pay and reimbursing him 
for lost wages, benefits, and compensation. 
Discussion 
Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b), provides, in relevant part, that a 
school district may immediately suspend a permanent employee of the school district 
 
1 The statement of charges was served on Okewoye on May 17, 2024. 3 involving moral turpitude, with incompetency due to mental disability, with willful 
refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by 
reasonable rules and regulations of the employing school district, or with violation of 
 
Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), authorizes the permanent 
employee to seek review of the order of suspension by motion to the Office of 
Administrative Hearings. This section limits the review of a motion to immediately 
reverse a suspension 
statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate 
 
The written submissions of the parties and their oral argument have been 
considered. Based upon a review of the charges, the District has alleged facts which, if 
true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension under Education 
Code section 44939, subdivision (b), on the grounds of immoral conduct. However, the 
alleged facts do not describe egregious misconduct within the meaning of Education 
Code sections 44932, subdivision (a)(1), and 44010. 
  4ORDER
The motion for reversal of the immediate suspension of Newton Okewoye by 
Los Angeles Unified School District is denied.
DATE:
FRANCES M. VALDEZ
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings
