BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 
Suspension Filed by: 
VERONICA PEREZ, a Permanent Certificated Employee, 
v. 
LONG BEACH UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
OAH No. 2024040623 
ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 
SUSPENSION 
(Ed. Code, ยง 44939, subd. (c)(4)) 
Administrative Law Judge Karen Reichmann, State of California, Office of 
Administrative Hearings, heard this motion by videoconference on May 3, 2024. 
Attorney Ilissa B. Gold appeared on behalf of Veronica Perez, the moving party. 
Attorney Anthony P. DeMarco appeared on behalf of the Long Beach Unified 
School District (District). 2 PROCEDURAL HISTORY 
On March 6, 2024, a statement of charges was filed and served against Veronica 
Perez, pursuant to Education Code sections 44932 and 44939, alleging a total of five 
causes for dismissal, including willful refusal to perform regular assignments without 
reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and regulations of the District 
(willful refusal). The District placed Perez on immediate suspension without pay, 
pursuant to Education Code section 44939, based upon the willful refusal allegation. 
Perez filed a motion for immediate reversal of her suspension without pay, 
pursuant to Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1). She argues that the 
District has not alleged a sufficient basis to place her on immediate unpaid status 
because the factual allegations in the statement of charges do not establish willful 
refusal. The District opposes the motion. 
DISCUSSION 
Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b), provides that a school district 
may immediately suspend a permanent certificated employee who has been charged 
h willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, as 
prescribed by reasonable rules and regulations  of the District. 
motion filed pursuant to this section shall be limited to a determination as to whether 
the facts as alleged in the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a 
 
The written submissions and oral argument of the parties have been considered. 
The statement of charges contains numerous allegations that Perez repeatedly failed 3to perform assigned duties despite directives and corrective memoranda. These acts, if 
proven, establish cause for discipline for willful refusal.
Based upon a review of the statement of charges, the District has alleged facts 
sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension under Education Code section 
44939, subdivision (b).
ORDER
Veronica Perez is DENIED. The 
Veronica Perez is upheld.
DATE:
KAREN REICHMANN
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings
