BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 
Suspension of: 
EFREN CADENA, 
A Permanent Certificated Employee, 
Moving Party, 
and 
LOS ANGELES UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, 
Responding Party. 
OAH No. 2024120165 
ORDER GRANTING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 
SUSPENSION 
Ji-Lan Zang, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings (OAH), 
State of California, heard this matter by videoconference on January 3, 2025. 
Tamra M. Smith, Attorney at Law, represented moving party Efren Cadena
(Employee). 2 Leslie Chi, Attorney at Law, represented responding party Los Angeles Unified 
School District (District). 
District has suspended Employee without pay pending the outcome of its action 
to dismiss Employee. The basis for the suspension under Education Code section 
44939 is immoral conduct. In his motion (Motion), Employee seeks an order for the 
immediate reversal of his suspension. District opposes the Motion and has filed an 
opposition (Opposition). 
Counsel for both parties presented oral argument at the motion hearing. The 
parties did not dispute that the Statement of Charges (SOC), attached as an exhibit to 
the Motion, is the operative pleading for this proceeding. 
Motion for Immediate Reversal of Suspension 
A school district may immediately suspend without pay a permanent certificated 
employee charged with immoral conduct. (Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (b).) A suspended 
employee may file a motion for immediate reversal of the suspension with OAH. (Ed. 
Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(1).) An administrative judge’s review of the suspended 
employee’s motion shall be “limited to a determination as to whether the facts as 
alleged in the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for 
immediate suspension under this section.” (Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(1).)
Although the administrative law judge must accept well-pleaded facts in the 
SOC as true, the administrative law judge need not accept contentions, deductions, or 
conclusions of fact or law. ( (1985) 39 Cal.3d 311, 318.) Conclusory 
characterizations of conduct as intentional, willful, or fraudulent are “patently 
insufficient.” (  (1977) 73 Cal.App.3d 864, 872.) Where reading the 
allegations reveals the existence of an affirmative defense, the complaining party must 3 plead around the defense by alleging specific facts that would avoid the apparent 
defense. (  39 Cal.3d at p. 318.)
SOC 
During the relevant period, Employee was employed by District as a Physical 
Education (PE) teacher at Bravo Medical Magnet High School. The SOC alleges 
Employee engaged in immoral conduct in violation of Education Code sections 44932, 
subdivision (a)(1), and 44939; committed unprofessional conduct in violation of 
Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(2); persistently violated or refused to 
obey school laws or regulations in violation of Education Code section 44932, 
subdivision (a)(8); and his unfitness for service is evident under Education Code section 
44932, subdivision (a)(6). 
In support of its charge of immoral conduct, District alleges the following: 
1. During the 2022-2023 school year, [Employee] 
unnecessarily and inappropriately exchanged cell phone 
numbers with student Victoria R. 
2. Beginning on or about March 2, 2023 and ending on or 
about March 14, 2023, [Employee] unnecessarily and 
inappropriately communicated with student Victoria R. via 
cell phone during school hours, including but not limited to 
the following:
a. On or about March 2, 2023 around 9:23 AM, 
[Employee] unnecessarily and inappropriately texted 
student Victoria R. to meet him in the weight room.4 b. On or about March 6, 2023 around 8:41 AM, 
[Employee] unnecessarily and inappropriately texted 
student Victoria R. whether she was at the school.
c. On or about March 7, 2023 around 11:20 AM, 
[Employee] unnecessarily and inappropriately texted 
student Victoria R. requesting to borrow her phone to order 
food and implied that she should go to the restroom and 
leave her class during instructional time so that he may 
borrow her phone.
d. On or about March 10, 2023 around 10:02 AM, 
[Employee] unnecessarily and inappropriately texted 
student Victoria R. requesting her to order food from Urth 
Cafe with her Apple Pay, told her she could get one item 
and told her he would pay her back through Zelle. 
e. On or about March 14, 2023 around 12:35 PM, 
[Employee] unnecessarily and inappropriately texted 
student Victoria R., another student's address in Riverside 
County and asked how far she lived from the address. 
3. [Employee’s] conduct alleged in Charges 1 through 2, 
inclusive, constituted grooming or was indicative of a 
person attempting or intending to groom a minor. 
(SOC, pp. 2-3.) 5 District contends the foregoing conduct warrants Employee’s immediate 
dismissal without pay. Employee contends District failed to plead sufficient facts to 
establish immoral conduct. According to Employee, District’s claims of immoral 
conduct are conclusory because District failed to specify the context of the alleged 
texts and did not directly quote any of the alleged texts. Employee further asserts a PE 
teacher texting a student to come to the weight room, asking whether she was in 
school, and whether she lives near another student could have any number of 
innocuous purposes. 
Immoral Conduct 
“[T]he term ‘immoral conduct’ in [Education Code] section 44932, subdivision 
(a)(1) ‘stretch[es] over so wide a range’ of conduct that it ‘embrace[s] an unlimited area 
of conduct.’” (  (2020) 53 
Cal.App.5th 327, 337, quoting  (1969) 1 Cal.3d 
214, 224-225.) Courts have defined immoral conduct in school settings as conduct 
“‘hostile to the welfare of the general public and contrary to good morals. Immorality 
has not been confined to sexual matters, but includes conduct inconsistent with 
rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; or as wil[l]ful, 
flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral indifference to the opinions of 
respectable members of the community, and as an inconsiderate attitude toward good 
order and the public welfare.’” (
( ) (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811, quoting 
 (1951) 36 Cal.2d 734, 740.)
Immoral conduct also “must be considered in conjunction with the unique 
position of public school teachers, upon whom are imposed ‘responsibilities and 
limitations on freedom of action which do not exist in regard to other callings.’” (6 (2011) 194 
Cal.App.4th 1454, 1466.) “Thus, the term must be ‘considered in the context in which 
the Legislature considered it, as conduct which is hostile to the welfare of the general 
public . . . more specifically in this case, conduct which is hostile to the welfare of the 
school community.’” ( , , 53 Cal.App.5th at p. 337, quoting , 
, 1 Cal.3d at p. 224.)
Disposition 
In this case, District alleges Employee’s conduct constitutes grooming. However, 
Employee’s texts to Victoria R., asking her to meet in the weight room, inquiring 
whether she was at school and whether she lived near another student, and requesting 
her to order food for him and to borrow her phone to order food, are not sexual in 
nature. Without any context, these texts also do not demonstrate any attempts by the 
Employee to target, isolate, or control Victoria R., as District contends in its Opposition. 
(Opposition, p. 4.) For example, there is no allegation that Employee sent these texts 
only to Victoria R.; there is no allegation that Employee asked to meet Victoria R. alone 
in the weight room; there is no allegation that Employee’s offer of paying for one item 
of food from Urth Café was not to compensate Victoria R. for ordering food on 
Employee’s behalf. 
There is also no allegation in the SOC, as District contends in its Opposition, 
that Employee “encouraged the student to lie and break school rules to meet with 
him.” (Opposition, p. 4.) District alleges in the SOC: “[Employee] implied that [Victoria 
R.] should go to the restroom and leave her class during instructional time so that he 
may borrow her phone.” (SOC, p. 2.) However, without a direct quote from the original 
text, it is unclear whether Employee in fact instructed Victoria R. to lie about going to 
the bathroom so that she could leave her class, or District simply interpreted his words 7 as such. (See , , 39 Cal.3d at p. 318 [when testing the sufficiency of 
allegations in a pleading, deductions should be disregarded].) 
In sum, based on the allegations in the SOC, Employee may have engaged in 
personal and inappropriate communications with Victoria R., but his actions do not
constitute grooming behavior for the purpose of sexualizing his relationship with her. 
Employee’s alleged actions may reflect poor judgment, unfitness for service, or 
unprofessional conduct, but, without additional facts, those acts are not “indicative of 
corruption, indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; or as willful, flagrant, or shameless 
conduct showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the 
community, and as an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public 
welfare.” ( , 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811.)
All arguments made by counsel in their briefs and at oral argument have been 
considered. The facts pleaded in the SOC, if true, are not sufficient to support a claim 
against Employee for immoral conduct and therefore cannot form a basis for 
immediate suspension without pay under Education Code section 44939, subdivision 
(c)(1). Accordingly, the Motion for Immediate Reversal of Suspension is granted. 
// 
// 
//
// 
//
//8 ORDER
The motion by Efren Cadena for immediate reversal of his suspension without 
pay is granted. 
DATE:
JI-LAN ZANG
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings
