BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 
Suspension of: 
HARRY BRAY, Moving Party, 
A Permanent Certificated Employee, 
and 
SACRAMENTO CITY UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, Responding 
Party. 
OAH No. 2025070162 
ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 
SUSPENSION  
Administrative Law Judge Mary Agnes Matyszewski, Office of Administrative 
Hearings (OAH), State of California, heard oral argument on this matter on August 1, 
2025, by videoconference. 
Matthew Chevedden, Attorney at Law, Langenkamp, Curtis, Price, Lindstrom & 
Chevedden, L.L.P., represented moving party, Harry Bray.  
 2 Seth Eckstein and Daniel Zerga, Attorneys at Law, Fagen Friedman & Fulfrost, 
L.L.P., represented Sacramento City Unified School District (district). 
August 1, 2025. 
BACKGROUND FACTS  
On June 6, 2025, the district filed the Statement of Charges seeking the 
immediate suspension without pay and dismissal of Mr. Bray, a permanent certificated 
employee. The district alleged that during the 2023-2024 school year, Mr. Bray, a third 
grade teacher, allowed at least five female students to sit on his lap during class time 
and in the presence of other students. The district also alleged he allowed at least two 
female students to kiss his face. The Statement of Charges alleged that the district 
inferred a depraved motive from his behaviors. The Statement of Charges referenced 
events from 2005 as evidence of past similar conduct and directives given to Mr. Bray. 
The Statement of Charges contained several grounds for dismissal: immoral 
conduct, unprofessional conduct, dishonesty, evident unfitness for service, persistent 
violation of or refusal to obey state school laws or regulations prescribed by the 
, persistent violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of 
the state or reasonable regulations prescribed for the government of the public 
schools by the state board or by the governing board of the school district, and willful 
refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause. (Ed. Code, §§ 44932, 
subd. (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(4), (a)(6), & (a)(8), and 44939.) (Of note, the Statement of 
Charges incorrectly referenced Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(2), for 
the dishonesty charge; the correct subdivision is (a)(4), and listed persistent violation  
 3 as the fourth charge but it was the fifth.) The district suspended Mr. Bray without pay 
pending a hearing before a Commission on Professional Competence. 
On July 3, 2025, Mr. Bray filed his Motion for Immediate Reversal of Suspension 
with OAH, pursuant to Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1). OAH set the 
matter for oral argument and established a briefing schedule. 
MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF SUSPENSION AND OPPOSITION  
In his motion, Mr. Bray asserts the charges were not sufficiently pled to establish 
that he engaged in immoral conduct. He contends the charge that students kissed his 
face is misleading because any student who did so, kissed him on his cheek. Further, 
the district did not allege any sexual motive for his actions. Mr. Bray argued his actions 
demonstrated, at most, classroom management issues or his failure to control his 
student behaviors, but not immoral conduct because he did not induce or encourage 
any student to sit on his lap or kiss him. 
to events in 2005 were time-barred and inadmissible at hearing. Mr. Bray next asserted 
that the district failed to plead facts sufficient to show willful refusal to perform regular 
assignments without reasonable cause. 
opposition asserted that it had pled sufficient specific facts to 
support a finding of immoral conduct, and cited various case law in support of its 
position. 
indifference to stud The district asserted that its reference to 2005 events 
was alleged to demonstrate that Mr. Bray was on notice not to engage in this type of 
behavior, his continuing to do so demonstrated his willful refusal to follow directives, 
and that evidence could be used for impeachment purposes. The district argued that 
the factors espoused in  (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214,  
 4 demonstrate Mr. Bray is unfit to teach. The district further asserted it had pled 
sufficient facts to support a finding that Mr. Bray willfully refused to obey laws and 
district regulations. 
In his reply, Mr. Bray asserted the district now attempts to introduce new facts 
not pled, as it was now arguing conduct suggests a sexual motive or a moral 
indifference to student welfare, which was not alleged in the Statement of Charges.1 
 
own evidence. Further, he asserted the district misunderstands common behaviors of 
children who run around, play, and give pecks on the cheek. He again asserted his 
time-barred claim regarding the 2005 events and argued that evidence cannot be used 
for impeachment purposes. 
ORAL ARGUMENTS  
At oral argument, Mr. Bray asserted that it is normal for children to run around, 
and give pecks on the cheek. There is nothing sexual about what occurred, rather the 
facts show Mr. Bray had issues with the ability to control students in his classroom. He 
did try to dissuade the students and never asked any of them to sit on his lap or kiss 
his cheek. The facts demonstrate a performance issue with classroom management. 
There was no willful refusal to comply with applicable laws and district policies 
or. 
 
 
1 Given that the district alleged that it inferred a depraved motive from Mr. 
  
 5 The district asserted in its oral argument that facts supporting the immoral 
conduct charges had been fairly well laid out in the Statement of Charges. 
R  his framing of the narrative, but did not 
demonstrate that there was not evidence to support the charge. The district further 
asserted that the length of time these incidents occurred, as well as the number of 
them, showed this was more than just a performance issue or lack of classroom 
control. Mr. Bray failed to establish the proper boundaries or act as expected. The 
district further asserted that the prior incidents supported the allegation of persistent 
refusal to obey applicable laws and regulations. 
IMMORAL CONDUCT ANALYSIS  
There is broad discretion in determining what constitutes immoral conduct in 
the context of teacher disciplinary matters. (
 (1999) 20 Cal.4th 327.) 
Immoral conduct has been defined generally as that which is hostile to the 
welfare of the general public and contrary to good morals. It has not been confined to 
sexual matters, but includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of 
corruption, indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; or as wilful, flagrant, or shameless 
conduct showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the 
community, and as an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public 
welfare. (  (1960) 179 
Cal.App.2d 808, 811; (1970) 9 Cal.App.3d 967, 
972.) Immoral conduct is not considered in the abstract but must be considered in the 
context in which the Legislature considered it, as conduct which is hostile to the 
welfare of the general public; more specifically, conduct which is hostile to the welfare  
 6 of the school community. (  (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 
224.) 
Immoral conduct alone cannot serve as a basis to terminate a teacher unless the 
conduct indicates the teacher is also unfit to teach. (  at p. 972.) The 
definition of immoral or unprofessional conduct must be considered in conjunction 
with the unique position of public school teachers, upon whom are imposed 
ions on freedom of action which do not exist in regard to 
(1971) 16 Cal.App.3d 820, 824.) 
ust be considered in conjunction with the unique 
position of public school teachers, upon w
(2011) 194 Cal.App.4th 1454, 
1466 the context in which the Legislature 
considered it, as conduct which is hostile to the welfare of the general public . . . more 
specifically in this case, conduct which is hostile to the welfare of the school 
(2020) 53 Cal.App.5th 
339, 337, quoting , , 1 Cal.3d at p. 224.) 
Having considered the pleadings, written submissions, and oral arguments, the 
district alleged facts which, if true, could constitute immoral conduct and are sufficient 
to constitute a basis for immediate suspension under Education Code section 44939, 
subdivision (b). 
WILLFUL VIOLATION ANALYSIS 
In its brief, the district alleged that Mr. Bray was given directives in the past not 
to engage in the types of behaviors alleged in the statement of charges, and that his  
 7 behavior during the 2023-2024 school year demonstrated his willful refusal to comply 
with district directives. Mr. Bray argues that evidence from 2005 is time-barred by 
Education Code section 44944, subdivisions (b)(2)(A). However, that subdivision 
contains exceptions. Subdivision (b)(2)(A)(i) permits testimony or evidence of 
allegations of behavior or communication of a sexual nature with the pupil and 
Education Code section 44944, subdivision (2)(B), allows the introduction of the 
district regularly kept records,  
Having considered the pleadings, written submissions, and oral arguments, the 
district alleged facts which, if true, could constitute willful refusal to perform regular 
assignments without reasonable cause, and are sufficient to constitute a basis for 
immediate suspension under Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b). 
DISHONESTY ARGUMENT  
Mr. Bray also addressed the dishonesty charge to the extent the district alleges 
it evidences immoral conduct. He asserted the Statement of Charges misstates the 
facts of what occurred when he was interviewed. However, dishonesty is not one of the 
charges that allows a district to immediately suspend an employee, and that charge 
was not a suspension. arguments about the inaccuracy 
of the facts alleged to support a dishonesty charge are insufficient to overturn his 
suspension and should be made at hearing. 
/// 
/// 
/// 
///  
 8 ORDER 
Good cause not having been established, the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 
 
 
DATE: August 1, 2025 
 
  
 
MARY AGNES MATYSZEWSKI 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings
 