BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 
Suspension of: 
MARK JOSEPH, 
Moving Party, 
and 
BAKERSFIELD CITY SCHOOL DISTRICT, 
Responding Party. 
OAH No. 2025021031 
ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 
SUSPENSION 
Thomas Heller, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings 
(OAH), State of California, heard this matter by videoconference on March 28, 2025. 
Joshua F. Richtel, Esq., Tuttle & McCloskey, represented moving party Mark 
Joseph (Joseph). 2 Ellen C. Wu, Esq., Dannis Woliver Kelley, represented responding party 
Bakersfield City School District (District). 
BACKGROUND 
On February 1, 2025, the District’s Assistant Superintendent of Human 
Resources signed a Statement of Charges recommending that the Board of Education 
direct the Superintendent or his designee to notify Joseph of the Board’s intention to 
immediately suspend him without pay and dismiss him from employment. Upon 
receiving the notice, Joseph demanded a hearing on the Statement of Charges and 
moved for immediate reversal of the suspension under Education Code section 44939, 
subdivision (c)(1). The District filed an opposition to the motion, and counsel for 
Joseph and the District presented oral argument at the motion hearing. 
Joseph contends the facts as alleged in the Statement of Charges, even if true, 
do not support his immediate suspension without pay for immoral conduct as 
charged. The Statement of Charges alleges Joseph, a permanent certificated employee 
assigned as a special education teacher at a District middle school, engaged in 
“inappropriate, unacceptable, and immoral conduct” during the 2021-2022 school 
year, the extended school year from mid-June to July 1, 2022, and the 2024-2025 
school year. (Statement of Charges, ¶ 11.) While not at issue in this motion, the
Statement of Charges also alleges Joseph’s conduct was unprofessional and evidences
his unsatisfactory performance, persistent violation of or refusal to obey the rules 
governing his employment, and unfitness for service. 
During the 2021-2022 school year, Joseph is charged with using his legs to 
restrain a student sitting on the floor in front of him; pulling another student’s arms 3 around the back of a chair and holding the student’s hands; repeatedly telling parents
to keep students at home when their one-on-one aide was absent; repeatedly falling 
asleep during class; and repeatedly walking around his classroom barefoot and 
rubbing his bare feet. (Statement of Charges, ¶ 3(a)-(f).)
During the extended school year from mid-June to July 1, 2022, Joseph is 
charged with wrapping his legs around a student to restrain him; ignoring the non-
verbal students in his class; telling a student’s parents to keep their student at home 
because the student’s aide had to go to court, which was a private matter; directing an 
aide to instruct a student’s parent to keep their student at home because the aide 
would be absent; telling a coworker she should be wary of one of Joseph’s aides 
because Joseph did not like her; and walking around his classroom barefoot and 
rubbing his bare feet. (Statement of Charges, ¶ 4(a)-(g).) Joseph is also charged with 
playing a “dark and violent” two-minute video clip in front of three aides and three 
students, making at least one aide uncomfortable and upset. ( , ¶ 4(h).) 
During the 2024-2025 school year, Joseph is charged with instructing a low 
functioning student (F.R.) to take an extremely low functioning student (I.G.) to the 
restroom because I.G. “has done number two and her diaper was stinking up the 
room,” or words to that effect. Joseph allegedly made the statement in the presence of 
I.G. and other students. Per Joseph’s instructions, F.R. took I.G. to the restroom and 
removed I.G.’s shoes, pants, and diaper. Without wearing gloves, F.R. used toilet paper 
to clean the front and back of I.G.’s vagina and rectum area and then put on a new 
diaper for I.G. The incident allegedly violated District policy requiring an aide to 
perform such tasks. In addition, Joseph allegedly instructed the other five female 
students in his class to go to the restroom unsupervised, which also violated District 4 policy requiring an aide to escort special education students. (Statement of Charges, 
¶ 8(a)-(e).) 
The District opposes Joseph’s motion and contends the allegations are sufficient 
to support Joseph’s immediate suspension without pay for immoral conduct under 
Education Code section 44939. 
LEGAL STANDARDS 
The governing board of a school district may immediately suspend a permanent 
certificated employee who has been charged with “immoral conduct, conviction of a 
felony or of any crime involving moral turpitude, with incompetency due to mental 
disability, with willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, 
as prescribed by reasonable rules and regulations of the employing school district,” or 
advocating communism. (Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (b).) A suspended employee may 
serve and file with the Office of Administrative Hearings a motion for immediate 
reversal of suspension. ( , subd. (c)(1).) An administrative law judge reviews the 
motion, and the review “shall be limited to a determination as to whether the facts as 
alleged in the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for 
immediate suspension under this section.” ( ) Although material facts properly 
pleaded must be accepted as true, the administrative law judge need not accept 
contentions, deductions, or conclusions of fact or law. ( (1985) 39 Cal.3d 
311, 318.)
Immoral conduct is conduct “‘hostile to the welfare of the general public and 
contrary to good morals. Immorality has not been confined to sexual matters, but 
includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, 5 depravity, dissoluteness; or as wilful, flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral 
indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the community, and as an 
inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public welfare.’” (
(1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811, 
quoting  (1951) 36 Cal.2d 734, 740.) 
For purposes of teacher discipline, conduct cannot be characterized as immoral 
unless it indicates a teacher is unfit to teach. (
(1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 229 ( ).) “In determining whether the teacher's conduct 
thus indicates unfitness to teach the board may consider such matters as the 
likelihood that the conduct may have adversely affected students or fellow teachers, 
the degree of such adversity anticipated, the proximity or remoteness in time of the 
conduct, the type of teaching certificate held by the party involved, the extenuating or 
aggravating circumstances, if any, surrounding the conduct, the praiseworthiness or 
blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the conduct, the likelihood of the 
recurrence of the questioned conduct, and the extent to which disciplinary action may 
inflict an adverse impact or chilling effect upon the constitutional rights of the teacher 
involved or other teachers.” ( , footnotes omitted.) Not all of these factors need be 
examined, only the pertinent ones. (
(1993) 16 Cal.App.4th 1766, 1777.)
ANALYSIS 
The properly pleaded material facts, if true, constitute a basis for Joseph’s 
immediate suspension for immoral conduct under Education Code section 44939. At a 
minimum, the facts alleged about the restroom incident during the 2024-2025 school 
year describe conduct hostile to the welfare of the general public and against public 6 morals; more specifically in this case, conduct that is hostile to the welfare of the 
school community. (See , , 1 Cal.3d at p. 224.) Furthermore, considering 
the factors, the allegations about that incident, if true, indicate an unfitness 
to teach. 
Accepting the facts as alleged, Joseph’s conduct with respect to the restroom 
incident was a serious violation of I.G.’s dignity and privacy and District policy. Joseph’s 
conduct also violated F.R.’s rights by directing her to perform toileting care for a 
classmate. Joseph’s alleged statement that I.G. “has done number two and her diaper 
was stinking up the room,” or words to that effect, was demeaning and belittling to 
I.G., which is an aggravating circumstance. Joseph’s conduct is recent, and the 
likelihood of adverse impact to the students and school community is high. The 
District justifiably expects better from a special education teacher who serves 
particularly vulnerable students. These considerations are sufficient to indicate an 
unfitness to teach regardless of whether recurrence of the questioned conduct is likely. 
Disciplinary action for Joseph’s alleged conduct would also have no discernible 
adverse or chilling effect on his constitutional rights. (See , , 1 Cal.3d at 
p. 229.)
Joseph points to allegations in the Statement of Charges that he described his 
handling of the restroom incident as a “bone-headed decision” during the District’s 
subsequent investigation. (Statement of Charges, ¶ 8(f).) According to Joseph, this 
compels reversal of his immediate suspension because immoral conduct “requires 
more than just a mistake.” (Motion, p. 8.) But Joseph’s after-the-fact statement does 
not indicate his alleged behavior during the incident was “just a mistake.” The facts 
alleged describe intentional conduct and a flagrant disregard for I.G.’s (and F.R.’s) 
rights. 7 The Statement of Charges also alleges Joseph physically restrained special
education students during the 2021-2022 year and extended school year, among other 
alleged misconduct. Since the facts alleged about the restroom incident alone justify 
Joseph’s immediate suspension, it is unnecessary to analyze those other allegations on 
this motion. 
ORDER 
Mark Joseph’s motion for immediate reversal of suspension is denied. 
 
DATE:
THOMAS HELLER
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings