BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 
Suspension of: 
BRETT HALL, Moving Party 
v. 
HEMET UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
OAH No. 2025061002 
ORDER GRANTING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 
SUSPENSION 
Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) Patrice De Guzman Huber, Office of 
Administrative Hearings, State of California, heard this matter by videoconference on 
July 11, 2025, from Sacramento, California. Dyland Griffith, Esq., represented moving 
party Brett Hall, who was present. Marie Naguib, Esq., represented Hemet Unified 
School District (District).
Procedural Background 
On June 17, 2025, the Governing Board of the District approved a Statement of 
Charges to dismiss Mr. Hall based on alleged: (1) immoral conduct; (2) dishonesty; 
(3) unsatisfactory performance; (4) evident unfitness for service; and (5) persistent 2 violation of or refusal to obey the school laws of the state or reasonable regulations 
prescribed for the government of public schools. On the same date, the District gave 
notice to Mr. Hall of the Governing Board’s decision and placed him on immediate 
suspension without pay under Education Code section 44939.
On June 26, 2025, Mr. Hall filed a Motion for Immediate Reversal of Suspension
pursuant to Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1). Mr. Hall contends the 
District has not alleged a sufficient basis for immediate unpaid status because, Mr. Hall 
argues, the allegations in the Statement of Charges do not rise to the level of immoral 
conduct. On July 1, 2025, the District filed its opposition to Mr. Hall’s motion.
On July 11, 2025, the parties presented oral argument. 
Analysis 
Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b), states, in pertinent part, that a 
school district may immediately suspend a permanent employee who has been 
charged with immoral conduct. Under subdivision (c)(1), such an employee may file a 
motion for immediate reversal of suspension, and the court’s review “shall be limited 
to a determination as to whether the facts as alleged in the statement of charges, if 
true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension under this section.”
The ALJ has considered the written submissions of the parties and oral 
argument. Based upon a review of the Statement of Charges, the District’s allegations,
if true, are insufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension under Education 
Code section 44939, subdivision (b).3 ORDER
GOOD CAUSE HAVING BEEN ESTABLISHED, the Motion for Immediate Reversal 
of Suspension is GRANTED. The District’s immediate suspension of Mr. Hall is 
REVERSED. The District shall immediately return Mr. Hall to paid status. The District 
shall make Mr. Hall whole for any lost wages, benefits, and compensation within 14 
days after service of this Order. (Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(5).)
DATE: July 15, 2025
PATRICE DE GUZMAN HUBER
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings
