BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 
Suspension of: 
COLUM MALEC, Moving Party 
and 
WASHINGTON UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, 
Responding Party. 
OAH No. 2025040005 
ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 
SUSPENSION 
Jennifer M. Russell, Senior Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative 
Hearings, State of California, heard this matter by videoconference on April 25, 
2025. Costa Kerestenzis, Attorney at Law, Beeson, Tayer & Bodine, represented 
Colum Malec (Malec),the moving party. Ingrid A. Meyers, Attorney at Law, Dannis 
Woliver Kelley, represented the Washington Unified School District (District), the 
responding party. 2 On February 27, 2025, pursuant to Education Code (Code) section 44939, 
subdivision (b), the District filed a Statement of Charges containing allegations 
charging Malec with, among other things, immoral conduct in violation of Code 
section 44932, subdivision (a)(1). Pursuant to Code section 44939, subdivision (b), 
the District immediately suspended Malec without pay. Pursuant to Code section 
44939, subdivision (c)(1), Malec served and filed with the Office of Administrative 
Hearings a Motion for Immediate Reversal of Suspension. Pursuant to Code section 
44939, subdivision (c)(2), the District filed an opposition, to which Malec filed a 
reply. 
Having considered the parties’ written submissions and oral arguments, 
pursuant to Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(4), the Administrative Law Judge 
issues the following Order denying the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 
Suspension. 
Standard for Conducting Review of Motion for Immediate Reversal of 
Suspension 
1. The governing board of a school district has the authority to suspend 
immediately a permanent employee without pay upon its filing of written charges 
for dismissal on grounds of immoral conduct, conviction of a felony or of any crime 
involving moral turpitude, incompetency due to mental disability, willful refusal to 
perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by 
reasonable rules and regulations, or violation of Code section 51530, which 
imposes a prohibition against advocacy of communism with intent to indoctrinate. 
(Code, § 44939, subd. (b).) Reviewing the statutory scheme for tenured teacher 
dismissal, the California Supreme Court, in 3 (1988) 45 Cal.3d 207, 215-216, has affirmed if one of the grounds for 
dismissal pursuant to Code section 44932 is also one of those specified in Code 
section 44939, the school district may immediately suspend the employee without 
pay pending disposition of the dismissal proceeding. 
2. Review of a motion for immediate reversal of suspension is “limited to 
a determination whether the facts as alleged in the statement of charges, if true, 
are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension under this section.” 
(Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(1).) 
3. Thus, review of a motion for immediate reversal of suspension is 
analogous to a demurrer, which tests the sufficiency of the allegations in a 
complaint. (  
(1986) 178 Cal.App.3d 1147, 1151.) Facts properly pleaded are accepted as true, but 
contentions, deductions, and conclusions of fact or law should be disregarded. 
( (1985) 39 Cal.3d 311, 318.) Conclusory characterizations of conduct 
as intentional, willful, or fraudulent are “patently insufficient.” (  
(1997) 73 Cal.App.3d 864, 872.) Where reading the allegations reveals the existence 
of an affirmative defense, the complaining party must plead around the defense by 
alleging specific facts that would avoid the apparent defense. ( , , 39 
Cal.3d at 318.) 
Facts Alleged in Statement of Charges 
4. In this matter, the Statement of Charges alleges, while employed by 
the District as a Social Studies teacher and Department Chairperson, in March 2021, 
Malec text-messaged a parent and asked that parent to deliver a message to 4 another parent who made unspecified comments during one or more meetings of 
the District’s Board of Trustees. Malec’s message to the commenting parent is 
alleged as “to get fucked.” The Statement of Charges further alleges when the 
parent tasked with delivering the message assured Malec the message would be 
delivered, Malec texted, “Make sure to include we already are working 12-14 hours 
days and weekends.” The Statement of Charges alleges the parent to whom the 
message was delivered perceived Malec’s “get fucked” comment as aggressive and 
threatening in nature and caused the parent concern for their safety and the safety 
of the parent’s student and family. 
5. The Statement of Charges additionally alleges Malec made several 
negative gender-based comments about one of his coworkers in 2023. The 
Statement of Charges alleges Malec said, “Sometimes her voice makes the hair on 
men’s arms rise in our department.” The Statement of Charges further alleges 
Malec “Told a male co-worker that a female co-worker was running against [Malec] 
for the position of union vice president because she hated men,” Malec “Called 
three female co-workers the ‘Ovarettes’ based on their gender,” and Malec 
“Showed a female co-worker a photograph of a bombing site.” 
6. The Statement of Charges additionally alleges, in 2024, Malec 
commented to a female colleague, who Malec was “well aware” had been 
subjected to sexual abuse and exploitation in the past and with whom Malec has “a 
quasi-supervisorial connection,” as follows: “Remember, I remind you of your pimp. 
We’ve never made love. If we did, we would move mountains. We would be 
unstoppable.” The Statement of Charges alleges Malec’s comments traumatized 
the female colleague. 5 7. The Statement of Charges additionally alleges Malec made a series of 
comments to the female colleague and others about the female colleague’s race 
approximately two to four times monthly between August 2022 and March 2024. 
The Statement of Charges alleges Malec told this female colleague to confront 
another teacher because she is a person of color and encouraged the female 
colleague to seek union or work opportunities because of her race and ancestry. 
Statement of Charges alleges Malec told her to “be in the union, you are a person 
of color, we need more represented”; she “fits into a special category as a woman 
and a minority”; she “could relate to Punjabi student[s] differently”; she “would 
have different opportunities as a person of color because the workplace needs 
people of color”; and she “had certain advantages as a person of color.” 
8. The Statement of Charges additionally alleges, in 2017, Malec “flipped 
off (indicating ‘fuck you’) his co-worker and an aide. Witnesses reported Malec 
engaged in a variety of inappropriate conduct of a sexual nature including the 
following: ‘smacking the top’ of an employee’s thigh, putting his hand around an 
employee’s waist while commenting that he wanted to ‘coerce her into leadership,’ 
called employees while intoxicated on multiple occasions, made inappropriate 
sexual comments to female employees, and made additional comments about co-
workers’ race.” The Statement of Charges further alleges Malec commented to a 
co-worker that she was “White or a person of color when it suited her.” 
9. The Statement of Charges additionally alleges, in 2024, several of 
Malec’s colleagues expressed fear of Malec and his treatment of women to the 
District’s current Assistant Superintendent. 6 Cause Exists for Immediate Suspension Based on Certain Allegations of 
Immoral Conduct 
10. In cases involving the dismissal of a school district’s permanent employee, 
“immoral conduct” has been defined generally as “that which is hostile to the welfare 
of the general public and contrary to good morals. Immorality has not been confined 
to sexual matters, but includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of 
corruption, indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; or a willful, flagrant, or shameless 
conduct showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the 
community, and as an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public 
welfare.” ( . 
(1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811.) 
11. In this matter, the central allegations in the Statement of Charges 
concern Malec’s obscene and profane commentaries and conduct and Malec’s 
eroticization and racialization of District employees. If true, these allegations, 
separately and in the aggregate, evince indecency, meaning obscene or indecorous 
behavior; hostility, meaning menacing or adversarial attitude; and an otherwise 
flagrant and shameless demonstration of moral indifference. 
12. The Statement of Charges on its face suggests the existence of an 
affirmative defense with respect to facts alleged to have occurred in 2017 and 
2021. 
13. Code section 44944, subdivision (a)(5), in pertinent part, provides the 
following:7 No testimony shall be given or evidence introduced relating 
to matters that occurred more than four years prior to the 
date of the filing of the notice [as provided for in section 
44934]. Evidence of records regularly kept by the governing 
board concerning the employee may be introduced, but no 
decision relating to the dismissal or suspension of any 
employee shall be made based on charges or evidence of 
any nature relating to matters concerning more than four 
years prior to the filing of the notice.  
14. Thus, Code section 44944, subdivision (a)(5), prohibits the District from 
introducing evidence relating to matters occurring more than four years before 
February, 27, 2025, when it filed notice of its intention to dismiss Malec. Code Section 
44944, subdivision (a)(5), further bars dismissal of Malec for alleged events occurring 
more than four years before the February 27, 2025 notice was filed. As pleaded, 
allegations of Malec’s conduct occurring in 2017 and 2021 are time-barred and thus 
insufficient to sustain Malec’s immediate suspension on the basis of immoral conduct.
15. The remaining pleaded facts, which the Statement of Charges alleges 
occurred in 2022, 2023, and 2024, if true, are sufficient to sustain Malec’s 
immediate suspension on the basis of immoral conduct. 
16. Based on the foregoing, good cause exists to deny the Motion for 
Immediate Reversal of Suspension. 8 ORDER
The Motion for Immediate Reversal of Suspension in OAH case number 
2025040005 is denied.
DATE:  
JENNIFER M. RUSSELL
Senior Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings
