BEFORE THE  
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA  
In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 
Suspension of:  
DAVID MOELLENKAMP , 
A Permanent Certificated Employee , 
Moving Party , 
and 
LOS ALAMITOS  UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT,  
Responding Party.  
OAH No. 2025080890 
ORDER DENYING  MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 
SUSPENSION  
On September 12, 2025 , a telephonic hearing on the motion filed by David 
Moellenkamp for immediate reversal of suspension (Motion) was held before Erlinda 
Shrenger , Administrative Law Judge  (ALJ) , Office of Administrative Hearings, State of 
California . 2 Ilissa B. Gold, of the law firm Reich, Adell & Cvitan , represented moving party 
David Moellenkamp  (Respondent ). 
Allison R. De La Riva, of the law firm Atkinson, Andelson, Loya, Ruud & Romo,  
represented responding  party  Los Alamitos Unified School District (District).  
The District has suspended Respondent  without pay pending the outcome of its 
action to dismiss  Respondent . The sole basis for the suspension under Education Code 
section 44939 is immoral conduct. In the Motion, Respondent  seeks an order for the 
immediate reversal of h is suspension. The District filed a written opposition to the 
Motion.  
Having considered the parties ’ written submissions and oral arguments,  the ALJ 
hereby finds and orders as follows. 
Motion for Immediate Suspension  
Education Code s ection 44939 authorizes the governing board of a school 
district, if it deems the action necessary, to immediately suspend a permanent 
employee from their  duties, upon the filing of written charges with the governing 
board charging the employee with immoral conduct, conviction of a felony or any crime involving moral turpitude, incompetency due to mental disability, willful refusal 
to perform regular assign ments without reasonable cause, or violation of section 
51530 (teaching communism).  
An employee who is suspended pursuant to Education Code section 44939 may 
serve and file with the Office of Administrative Hearings a motion for immediate 
reversal of suspension.  The motion shall include "a memorandum of points and 
authorities setting forth law and argument supporting the employee's contention that 3 the statement of charges does not set forth a sufficient basis for immediate 
suspension." (Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(1).) Review of the motion "shall be limited to 
a determination as to whether the facts as alleged in the statement of charges, if true, 
are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension u nder this section." ( Id.) 
The review of a motion made pursuant to Education Code section 44939  is 
analogous to a demurrer, which tests the sufficiency of the allegations in a complaint. 
(Pacifica Homeowners’ Ass’n v. Wesley Palms Retirement. Community  (1986) 178 
Cal.App.3d 1147, 1151.) Facts properly pleaded are accepted as true, but contentions, 
deductions, or conclusions of fact or law should be disregarded. ( Blank v. Kirwan  
(1985) 39 Cal.3d 311, 318.) Conclusory characterizations of conduct as intentional, 
willful, or fraudulent are “patently insufficient.” ( Brousseau v. Jarrett  (1997) 73 
Cal.App.3d 864, 872.)  
Statement of Charges  
Respondent currently serves as the Vocal Musical Teacher and Vocal Musical 
Director at Los Alamitos High School.  The Statement of Charges , at paragraph 24,  
alleges Respondent  engaged in immoral conduct during a student choir trip to 
Nashville, Tennessee in March 2 025. Respondent was described as being erratic, 
having abrupt mood changes, and making inappropriate comments toward students. 
His colleagues described him as “speaking in circles” and “steamrolling” other staff during rehearsals and with students.  Students and chaperones reported  being 
uncomfortable in Respondent’s presence to such an extent that Principal Christiana 
Kraus was required to  travel  to Nashville to address the ir alleged  concerns.  
// 
// 4 The Statement of Charges alleges the following specific incidents of concern:  
Upon arriving in Nashville from Los Alamitos, contrary to prior years, 
Respondent planned a rehearsal with students on the night of travel. At the rehearsal, 
Respondent made comments similar to, “I know you’re really tired, you need to smile. Do you even care to win? Are you going to be the first group not to win?”  (Statement 
of Charges (SOC), ¶  24(a).) 
At the first morning rehearsal , from 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m., the plan had been to 
get the students awake and ready for a 10:30 a.m.  performance. When a few students 
entered late (between 7:05 a.m. and 7:07 a.m.), Respondent “ berated ” the entire group 
of students. Respondent made comments similar to, “You can’t show up on time?! 
Your chaperones can’t even show up on time?!” The students left defeated and feeling 
that everything they did that morning was wrong. The students were  late to the 
rehearsal  because of a miscommunication between Respondent and the chaperones. 
(SOC, ¶ 24(c).) 
During a later rehearsal, Respondent used “swings” as threats to other students, 
telling students, “We’ve got people to take your place.”  Then, when students were 
getting “tapped” out so that “swings”  could step in and practice, Respondent yelled at 
the students for sitting out. Respondent’s colleagues on the trip described Respondent 
as being “pissed” and appearing to “go after” students individually such that they had 
to intervene to secure student safety. Respondent was described as “yelling at” and 
“chasing”  a specific female student. (SOC, ¶ 24(d).)  
On Saturday, Respondent called the chaperones together for a meeting; 
however, during the time set aside for the meeting, Respondent met with four male 
students.  The four students left th eir meeting  with Respondent in tears. Respondent 5 then told the adults, “We have four boys that may need to be sent home if they can’t 
follow the rules.”  Respondent allegedly made comments to these students, and others, 
including: (1) Telling students “the appl e doesn’t fall far from the tree” referencing the 
chaperones not following directions; (2) Berating students for being late and asking, 
“Who do you listen to, me or the chaperones. I’m in charge, it’s me”; and (3)  Telling 
students “they are not genetically as good as [another student] and [they] can blame 
[their] parents.” (SOC, ¶ 24(e).)  
On Saturday evening, while the students were at a dance chaperoned by the 
adults, Respondent met with Principal Kraus. After the meeting, Respondent  allegedly 
reprimanded his colleagues  attending the trip  for not being present with him when he 
met with  Principal Kraus. Respondent ridiculed his colleagues, telling them that no one 
on the team has the talent or creativity he has. (SOC, ¶ 24(f).)  
Respondent made  last-minute costume changes that caused stress among the 
parent volunteers and staff , and resulted in individuals staying up all night to meet 
respondent’s demands.  (SOC, ¶ 24(g).)  
Analysis  
“Immoral conduct” has been defined to mean that  which is hostile to the 
welfare of the general public and contrary to good morals.  Immoral conduct  includes 
conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, 
and dissoluteness. Immoral conduct includes  conduct that is willful, flagrant, or 
shameless, conduct showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the community, and conduct evincing  an inconsiderate attitude toward 
good order and the public welfare. (
Board of Education of the San Francisco Unified 
School Dist. v. Weiland  (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811.)  6 The determination of whether Respondent’s  conduct on the March 2025 choir 
trip constitutes immoral conduct must be viewed in the context of a teacher’s role in 
the public school system. “A teacher . . . in the public school system is regarded by the 
public and pupils in the light of an exemplar, whose words and actions are likely to be 
followed by the children coming under [their]  care and protection.” ( Board of Educ. of 
City of Los Angeles v. Swan  (1953)  41 Cal.2d 546, 552, citations omitted.) A teacher “i s 
entrusted with the custody of children and their high preparation for useful life. His 
habits, his speech, his good name, his cleanliness, the wisdom and propriety of his 
unofficial utterances, his associations, all are involved. His ability to inspire c hildren 
and to govern them, his power as a teacher, and the character for which he stands, are 
of major concern in a teacher’s selection and retention. . . .” ( Goldsmith v. Board of Ed. 
of Sacramento High School Dist.  (1924) 66 Cal.App. 157, 168)  
Here, the facts alleged in the Statement of Charges, if true, are sufficient to 
justify Respondent ’s immediate suspension under Education Code 44939 for immoral 
conduct.  During the choir trip to Nashville, Respondent was entrusted with the well -
being and safety of students . Respondent’s responsibilities towards the students was 
heightened because the students were away from their parents and far from h ome. 
During the trip, Respondent was hostile and berated the students , his work colleagues , 
and the parent chaperones, making them feel uncomfortable to be in his presence and 
raising such a level of concern that the Principal had to travel to  Nashville . The totality 
of Respondent’s conduct durin g the choir trip demonstrated moral indifference to the 
opinions of respectable members of the school community, and an inconsiderate 
attitude toward good order and his  students’ welfare.  
// 
// 7 Based on the foregoing, the ALJ finds the well -pleaded facts contained  in the 
Statement of C harges, if true, are sufficient to establish a basis for Respondent ’s 
immediate suspension under Education Code section 44949 for immoral conduct.  
Therefore, Respondent’s motion for immediate reversal of suspension  is denied.  
IT IS SO ORDERED.  
DATE:   
ERLINDA SHRENGER  
Administrative Law Judge  
Office of Administrative Hearings  
 
Erlinda Shrenger (Sep 23, 2025 15:29:51 PDT)Erlinda Shrenger 
09/23/2025