BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 
Suspension By: 
CARMEN CAMACHO, Moving Party 
vs. 
TEMECULA VALLEY UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT 
OAH No. 2025030200 
ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 
SUSPENSION 
Administrative Law Judge Coren D. Wong, Office of Administrative Hearings, 
State of California, heard this matter by videoconference on March 21, 2025, from 
Sacramento, California. Laurie Kamerrer of the law firm Adams Silva & McNally LLP 
represented Temecula Valley Unified School District (District). Fern M. Steiner of Fern 
Steiner Law, APC, represented moving party Carmen Camacho, who was present.
Procedural Background 
Ms. Camacho is a permanent certificated employee of the District. E. Joe 
Mueller, the District’s Executive Director (Certificated), Human Resources Development,
signed and filed with the District’s governing board a verified Notice of Intent to 2 Immediately Suspend Without Pay; Notice of Recommendation for Dismissal; and 
Statement of Charges (Notice of Intent). The Notice of Intent alleges cause to dismiss 
Ms. Camacho from the District for immoral conduct, unprofessional conduct, 
dishonesty, and persistent violation of or refusal to obey laws or reasonable 
regulations governing public schools. It further alleges cause to immediately suspend 
her without pay for immoral conduct and willful refusal to perform regular 
assignments without reasonable cause. 
On January 28, 2025, the District’s governing board approved the Notice of 
Intent and suspended Ms. Camacho without pay effective February 4, 2025. 
Ms. Camacho was given notice of the governing board’s actions and her right to 
appeal her suspension and dismissal. She timely appealed her dismissal. 
Ms. Camacho also timely filed a Motion for Immediate Reversal of Suspension
(MIRS). She argues: (1) the Notice of Intent’s allegations establish, at most, 
unprofessional conduct, unsatisfactory performance, and/or evident unfitness for 
service, none of which is a basis for immediate suspension; (2) published appellate 
decisions sustaining allegations of immoral conduct fall within one of three categories 
– sexual harassment or public sexual activities, drug use or possession, or theft – and 
the Notice of Intent alleges no such conduct; (3) “Respondent’s regular assignment 
was teaching her class which she was doing”; (4) the Notice of Intent alleges only a 
refusal to perform which is insufficient for immediate suspension; (5) 
(2020) 
53 Cal.App.5th 327 ( ), is factually distinguishable based on the degree of 
public notoriety and underlying misconduct involved; and (6) several of the Notice of 
Intent’s allegations are the subject of a settlement agreement between the parties and 3 “should not form the basis for the suspension without pay” because the District agreed 
not to pursue them at hearing. 
The District opposes the MIRS. It argues the Notice of Intent sufficiently alleges 
Ms. Camacho’s immoral conduct based on her: (1) disclosure of confidential student 
information; (2) treatment of students; (3) treatment of parents; (4) treatment of 
colleagues; and (5) dishonesty. The District also argues the Notice of Intent sufficiently 
alleges Ms. Camacho’s willful refusal to perform regular assignments without 
reasonable cause based on her refusal to observe confidentiality requirements and 
follow the applicable procedures for Individualized Education Plans (IEP). 
The parties presented oral argument. 
Applicable Law 
DISMISSAL OF PERMANENT CERTIFICATED EMPLOYEE
The governing board of a school district may dismiss a permanent certificated 
employee for immoral conduct, unprofessional conduct, dishonesty, or persistent 
violation of rules. (Ed. Code, § 44932, subd. (a)(1), (2), (4), & (8).) Dismissal proceedings 
are initiated by filing verified, written charges alleging the existence of cause for 
dismissal with the governing board. (Ed. Code, § 44934, subd. (b).) If the governing 
board approves the written charges, notice is given to the employee that she will be 
dismissed in 30 days, unless she requests a hearing challenging her dismissal. ( ., at 
subd. (b).) When the approved charges include allegations of immoral conduct or 
willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, the notice 
may include an immediate suspension without pay. (Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (b).)4 MIRS
An employee who has been immediately suspended may file a MIRS. (Ed. Code, 
§ 44939, subd. (c)(1).) “Review of a motion filed pursuant to this section shall be limited 
to a determination as to whether the facts as alleged in the statement of charges, if 
true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension under this section.” 
(.) In other words, the standard for deciding the motion is the same as that for
deciding a demurrer in a civil action, and a motion may be granted if the statement of 
charges fails, as a matter of law, to allege grounds for immediate suspension. (
(2009) 45 Cal.4th 992, 998 [”Moreover, we may affirm 
the sustaining of a demurrer only if the complaint fails to state a cause of action under 
any possible legal theory”].)
Only the legal sufficiency of the pleading is tested on demurrer, and the truth of 
the allegations is irrelevant. (  (2009) 178 
Cal.App.4th 1020, 1034.) Potential problems with proof are irrelevant. (
 (1983) 35 Cal.3d 197, 213-214, 
superseded by statute on different grounds as stated in 
(2006) 39 Cal.4th 235, 242.) “The reviewing court gives the complaint a 
reasonable interpretation, and treats the demurrer as admitting all material facts 
properly pleaded.” (  (1992) 2 Cal.4th 962, 967-968.) 
To survive demurrer, “the complaint need only allege facts sufficient to state a 
cause of action; each evidentiary fact that might eventually form part of the plaintiff’s 
proof need not be alleged.” (  (2012) 53 
Cal.4th 861, 872.) The complaint must allege “the essential facts of the plaintiff’s case 
with reasonable precision and with particularity sufficient to acquaint the defendant 5 with the nature, source, and extent of the plaintiff’s claim." (
(2015) 242 Cal.App.4th 1367, 1376.)
Although a demurrer does not admit the truth of contentions, deductions, or 
conclusions of fact or law alleged in the complaint, the distinction between such 
improper allegations and proper allegations of ultimate facts is not always clear and is 
at most one of degree. ( (1981) 117 Cal.App.3d 1, 6.) In 
(1962) 57 Cal.2d 463, the California Supreme Court concluded 
that the allegation “publicly assisted,” while a legal conclusion, was sufficient to survive 
demurrer. ( . at pp. 473-474.) “What is important is that the complaint as a whole 
contain sufficient facts to apprise the defendant of the basis upon which the plaintiff is 
seeking relief. [Citations.] The stricken language must be read not in isolation, but in 
the context of the facts alleged in the rest of petitioner’s complaint.” (
, , 117 Cal.App.3d at p. 6 [concluding the trial court erred in striking the 
allegations “wrongfully and intentionally,” “retaliation,” and “oppression, fraud, and 
malice” as legal conclusions].)
IMMORAL CONDUCT 
In describing what constitutes “immoral conduct” within the context of the 
Education Code, the court in 
(1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, said:
In , 36 Cal.2d 734, at page 
740 [227 P.2d 449], the Supreme Court quotes with 
approval the following statement from Words and Phrases, 
permanent edition, volume 20, pages 159-160: “The term 
‘immoral’ has been defined generally as that which is hostile 6 to the welfare of the general public and contrary to good 
morals. Immorality has not been confined to sexual matters, 
but includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or 
indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; 
or as willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral 
indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the 
community, and as an inconsiderate attitude toward good 
order and the public welfare.”
( , , 179 
Cal.App.2d at p. 811.) 
The court in 
(2011) 194 Cal.App.4th 1454, said that the meaning of immoral conduct 
“must be considered in conjunction with the unique position of public school teachers, 
upon whom are imposed ‘responsibilities and limitations on freedom of action which 
do not exist in regard to other callings.’ [Citation.]” ( . at p. 1466.) The role teachers 
play in students’ lives must be considered:
[T]he teacher is entrusted with the custody of children and 
their high preparation for useful life. [Her] habits, [her] 
speech, [her] good name, [her] cleanliness, the wisdom and 
propriety of [her] unofficial utterances, [her] associations, all 
are involved. [Her] ability to inspire children and to govern 
them, [her] power as a teacher, and the character for which 
[she] stands are matters of major concern in a teacher's 
selection and retention. 7 ( (1924) 66 
Cal.App.3d 157, 168.) 
WILLFUL REFUSAL
The term “willful” implies “that the person knows what [she] is doing and 
intends to do what [she] is doing.” ( (1963) 215 
Cal.App.2d 770, 775.) It “requires only that the prohibited act occur intentionally.” (
(1994) 29 Cal.App.4th 1432, 1438.) Willful
does not necessarily imply any evil intent on the part of the 
servant or malice toward his master. In civil cases, the word 
“willful,” as ordinarily used in courts of law, does not 
necessarily imply anything blamable, or any malice or 
wrong toward the other party, or perverseness or moral 
delinquency, but merely that the thing done or omitted to 
be done was done or omitted intentionally. It amounts to 
nothing more than this: That the person knows what [she] is 
doing, intends to do what [she] is doing, and is a free agent.
(  (1920) 45 Cal.App. 396, 404.) 
Analysis 
The gravamen of this action arises from Ms. Camacho’s conduct while employed 
as a second and fifth grade teacher during the 2023/2024 and 2024/2025 school years. 
The first several paragraphs of the Notice of Intent allege several expectations 
Ms. Camacho was required to meet as a classroom teacher, including: (1) “provide a 
flexible program and environment favorable to learning and personal growth in 8 accordance with each student’s ability”; (2) “provide individual and group instruction 
designed to meet individual needs and motivate students”; (3) “communicate with 
parents through a variety of means and hold parent conferences to discuss individual 
students’ progress”; and (4) “identify student needs and cooperate with other 
professional staff members in assessing and helping students solve learning 
problems.”
The Notice of Intent cites a board policy prohibiting District employees from:
a. Engaging in conduct that endangers students;  
b. Using profane or abusive language against staff; 
c. Willfully disrupting district or school operations; 
d. Dishonesty with staff; and
e. Divulging confidential information about students to 
persons not authorized to receive the information. 
THE NOTICE OF INTENT ALLEGES IMMORAL CONDUCT 
Disclosure of Confidential Student Information 
The Notice of Intent alleges students’ constitutional right “to attend campuses 
that are safe, secure, and peaceful.” It references federal and state law, several board 
policies, and a District administrative regulation regarding student privacy. It alleges 
the District’s expectation that teachers “exercise good judgment and adhere to the 
District’s Code of Ethics of the Education Profession.” Teachers must “maintain the 
highest ethical standards, exhibit professional behavior, follow district policies, abide 9 by state and federal laws, and exercise good judgment when interacting with students 
and other members of the school community.” 
The Notice of Intent alleges Ms. Camacho violated students’ constitution right, 
federal and state law, board policies, and an administrative regulation by disclosing 
confidential information about students’ behaviors and academic performance in 
emails addressed to a parent of a classmate of those students. It further alleges her 
disclosures demonstrated poor judgment and were contrary to the District’s Code of 
Ethics of the Education Profession. 
Treatment of Students 
The Notice of Intent cites numerous board policies and an administrative 
regulation requiring a positive school environment and civil behavior by and between 
all. One such policy provides: “The school environment should be characterized by 
positive interpersonal relationships among students and between students and staff.” 
Additionally: “All staff are expected to serve as role models for students by 
demonstrating positive, professional attitudes[,] and respect for each student and 
other staff members.”
Another policy documents the board’s belief “that each person should be 
treated with dignity and respect in their interactions within the school community.” It 
prohibits “students, staff, parents/guardians, and community members” from 
communicating or behaving in a manner that disrupts; hinders the District’s 
operations, provision of education, or other activity; or creates an unsafe environment.
An administrative regulation “promotes mutual respect, civility, and orderly conduct 
among District employees, parents, and the public.”10 Ms. Camacho’s treatment of students violated the board policies and District 
regulation. A second-grade student ran out of Ms. Camacho’s classroom, and she 
locked the door to prevent the student from returning. The student returned and 
began crying and pounding on the door, which Ms. Camacho ignored and instructed 
her students to do the same. 
On other occasions, Ms. Camacho scared one of her students to such a degree 
that the student fled the classroom. Another student cried after Ms. Camacho yelled at 
him. He became so fearful and anxious over being in her classroom that his parents 
removed him. Ms. Camacho compared her students to other classes and dogs in a 
derogatory and demeaning manner. She insulted students, caused anxiety, ignored 
and dismissed them, and refused to help them when they asked. 
Ms. Camacho’s cruel treatment of her students led to numerous parent 
complaints and requests that their children be reassigned to another classroom. 
During the first two months of the 2024/2025 school year, parents of four different 
students complained about Ms. Camacho’s treatment of their children and/or 
requested that their children be assigned to a different teacher. Additionally, 
“approximately, eight to ten adults and six students picketed [Ms. Camacho’s] return 
to the classroom on the sidewalk in front of the school during student arrival for 
approximately 45–50 minutes.” They carried signs “calling for [Ms. Camacho’s] removal 
from the classroom.” 
Four days later, a parent read a letter during the public comment portion of the 
board’s meeting. “The parent stated that [Ms. Camacho has] denied students their 
breaks; refused to allow them to use the restrooms; screamed, yelled and placed ‘IEP 
kids’ in the hallways for hours and without supervision; verbally attacked students and 11 called them names; and compared students to dogs.” The parent’s child stood next to 
him holding a sign describing what Ms. Camacho had done. 
Treatment of Parents 
The Notice of Intent alleges Ms. Camacho’s improper treatment of parents. A 
student’s parents forwarded a text message Ms. Camacho had sent them to Ms. 
Camacho's principal. “They advised Ms. Blackburn that [Ms. Camacho’s] messages were 
scaring their family.” In one message, Ms. Camacho threatened “to have [one of the 
parents] banned from volunteering in any second-grade classroom.” In another, she 
“threatened to ‘use [your] freedom of speech to post [their] nasty letter name 
included.’” 
Treatment of Colleagues 
The Notice of Intent alleges Ms. Camacho’s improper treatment of colleagues. 
For example, she reported being sick in the District’s online attendance program one 
day. Later that day, she went to her school site to conduct academic testing for a 
student. When her principal learned she was on campus, her principal called and told 
her to leave. Ms. Camacho responded, “’this is Bullshit’” and hung up.
Ms. Camacho repeatedly told a parent school administration did not support 
her and “intentionally assigned students with behavior issues to her.” When 
Ms. Camacho was confronted about not completing forms necessary for a student’s 
IEP, she tried to place the blame on another colleague by “dishonestly claiming that 
she had not received the forms.” Ms. Camacho’s conduct interfered with what should
be a collaborative environment. 12 Dishonesty
Finally, the Notice of Intent alleges Ms. Camacho’s repeated acts of dishonesty. 
When discussing her misconduct with District officials, she repeatedly denied 
disclosing confidential student information to parents of other students despite 
compelling evidence to the contrary. Ms. Camacho blamed a school psychologist for 
not providing the necessary forms prior to an IEP meeting even though the 
psychologist had done so twice. During a meeting with District administrators, she 
repeatedly denied making disparaging comments to students despite evidence 
establishing otherwise.
Ms. Camacho’s contention that the Notice of Intent alleges, at most, 
unprofessional conduct, unsatisfactory performance, or evident unfitness for service 
exceeds the scope of the demurrer. “As a general rule in testing a pleading against a 
demurrer the facts alleged in the pleading are deemed to be true, however improbable 
they may be.” (  (1981) 123 
Cal.App.3d 593, 604.) 
Ms. Camacho’s argument that several of the allegations are the subject of a 
settlement agreement between the parties is tantamount to an affirmative defense.
Although an affirmative defense may be raised by demurrer, the operative pleading 
must clearly allege the elements of the applicable defense. (Cf. 
 (2003) 110 Cal.App.4th 1145, 1152–1157 [trial court erred in overruling demurrer to 
cause of action for strict liability because allegations gave rise to an affirmative 
defense as a matter of law].) Ms. Camacho fails to cite any such allegations in the 
Notice of Intent.13 Ms. Camacho’s attempt to distinguish on the grounds the misconduct 
was more egregious and created greater notoriety than hers misses the point of the 
opinion. The appellate court did not specify the level of egregiousness or amount of 
notoriety required to constitute immoral conduct. Rather, it identified the misconduct’s 
adverse effect on students or teachers as one of the factors considered in determining 
whether the specified conduct constitutes immoral conduct. ( ., at pp. 339–341.)
Indeed, the appellate court expressly rejected the argument “there are three fixed 
categories of conduct that constitute ‘immoral conduct’ as a matter of law.” ( ., at p. 
337.) Ms. Camacho’s similar argument is rejected. 
THE NOTICE OF INTENT ALLEGES WILLFUL REFUSAL
Disclosure of Confidential Information 
As previously discussed, Ms. Camacho repeatedly disclosed confidential student 
information in emails sent to a parent not entitled to the information. The disclosures 
occurred in four separate emails sent over the course of three days. The allegation she 
“repeatedly dishonestly denied that [she] sent such emails to the parent and insisted 
they were emails [she] sent to administration” raises a reasonable inference that she 
knew she was not supposed to disclose the information. (See 
(2022) 81 Cal.App.5th 96, 104 [”We assume 
the truth of the properly pleaded factual allegations, facts that reasonably can be 
inferred from those expressly pleaded[,] and matters of which judicial notice has been 
taken”].) Ms. Camacho’s repeated disclosures, the short timeframe within which the 
disclosures occurred, and her knowledge she should not have made the disclosures 
support a reasonable inference she knew she was improperly disclosing confidential 
information and intended to do so. 14 Ms. Camacho’s argument that her “regular assignment was teaching her class 
which she was doing” is based on an overly myopic view of her “regular assignment” 
as a teacher for the District. As previously discussed, the Notice of Intent outlines 
numerous duties she was required and expected to perform beyond simply “teaching 
her class.” 
Refusal to Follow Proper IEP Procedures 
The Notice of Intent alleges Ms. Camacho’s improper use of sick leave time to
administer testing to a student to determine eligibility for special education. She did 
so because she failed to test him when she was supposed to. She did not request prior 
permission to use “sick leave” for testing because she believed her request would be 
denied. Ms. Camacho refused to complete forms required for another special 
education student’s assessment in a timely manner and failed to communicate with 
another such student’s parents. Her actions considered as a whole demonstrate a 
deliberate choice not to follow proper IEP procedures.
Conclusion 
The Notice of Intent’s allegations, and the inferences reasonably drawn from 
them, establish Ms. Camacho committed immoral conduct by disclosing confidential 
student information; improperly treating students, parents, and colleagues; and 
repeatedly being dishonest when asked about her misconduct. The allegations and 
reasonable inferences further establish she willfully refused to perform regular 
assignments without reasonable cause by disclosing confidential student information 
and refusing to follow proper IEP procedures. Therefore, Ms. Camacho’s MIRS should 
be denied. (See , 
supra, 81 Cal.App.5th at p. 104.) 15 ORDER
For the aforementioned reasons, Ms. Camacho’s Motion for Immediate Reversal 
of Suspension is DENIED, and the District’s immediate suspension of her is AFFIRMED. 
DATE: March 27, 2025 
COREN D. WONG
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings
 