BEFORE THE  
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA  
In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 
Suspension of:  
CHRISTOPHER KURNIK , Moving Party,  
a Permanent Certificated Employee,  
and 
BEVERLY HILLS UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT , 
Responding Party.  
OAH No. 2025080578 
ORDER GRANTING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 
SUSPENSION  
On September 12, 2025 , a videoconference hearing was held before 
Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) Glynda B. Gomez , Office of Administrative Hearings 
(OAH), State of California.  
Tamra Smith , Attorney, represented moving party Christopher Kurnik  
(Employee). Michael T. Travis , Attorney, represented responding party B everly Hills 
Unified  School District  (District).  2 District filed a Statement of Charges against Employee, and placed him on 
indefinite unpaid suspension. The suspension is based on allegations that Employee 
engaged in immoral conduct in violation of Education Code sections 44932, 
subdivision (a) (1). The Statement of Charges also alleges that Employee  displayed 
evident unfitness for service in violation of Education Code section 44939 , subdivision 
(a)(6). 
Employee timely filed a Motion for Immediate Reversal of Suspension (motion) 
with OAH, pursuant to section  44939, subdivision (c)(1),  on August 14, 2025.  District 
filed and served its Opposition Brief on August 29, 2025.  Employee filed and served a 
reply brief on September 8, 2025. The parties also presented oral argument during the 
hearing.  The ALJ considered all of the above in making this Order.  
Governing Procedure  
Section  44939 , subdivision (b), allow s an employing  school district to 
immediately suspend a permanent certificated employee without pay  under specific 
circumstances, including immoral conduct  without reasonable cause . In turn, section  
44939, subdivision (c)(1), allows a suspended employee to file a motion seeking to 
reverse t he unpaid suspension. R eview of such a motion “shall be limited to a 
determination as to whether the facts as alleged in the statement of charges, if true, 
are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension under this section.” (Ibid.) 
A motion such as this is analogous to a demurrer. Although well -pleaded facts 
must be accepted as true for purposes of a demurrer , “contentions, deductions or 
conclusions of fact or law”  need not be accepted.  (Blank v. Kirwan  (1985) 39 Cal.3d 
311, 318.)  Thus, a  demurrer can be sustained when a plaintiff’s “conclusory 3 characterization of defendant's conduct as intentional, willful  and fraudulent” is 
“patently insufficient.”  (Brousseau v. Jarrett  (1977) 73 Cal.App.3d 864, 872.)  
Immoral Conduct  
“Immoral conduct,” pursuant to section s 44932, subdivision (a), and 44939, has 
been defined to mean conduct that is willful, flagrant, or shameless, conduct showing 
moral indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the community, and as an inconsiderate attitude toward good order an d the public welfare.  It is used 
synonymous ly with dishonesty or a high degree of unfairness.  (
Board of Ed. of San 
Francisco Unified School Dist. v. Weiland  (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811  [Weiland  ].) 
In Weiland , the teacher was fired for falsif ying attendance records of her adult -
typing classes by signing the names of students to such records when the students were absent in order to secure her continued employment with the school district. The 
court upheld the teacher’s dismissal, finding that her conduct constituted immoral conduct. (
Weiland , supra , 179 Cal.App.2d at pp. 810 -812.)  
Immoral conduct also can be construed according to common usage.  “The term 
‘immoral’ has been defined generally as that which is hostile to the welfare of the general public and contrary to good morals.  Immorality has not been confined to 
sexual matters, but includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; or as willful, flagrant, or shameless 
conduct showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the 
community, and as an inconside rate attitude toward good order and the public 
welfare.”  (
Palo Verde etc. Sch. Dist. v. Hensey  (1970) 9 Cal.App.3d 967, 972  [Hensey  ].) 
In Hensey , a junior college teacher’s removal of the fire alarm and bell system, 
statement to the president of the college that he would remove it again if it were 4 replaced, references to “whore” and “whorehouses” throughout the year, discussion of 
“super -syphilis ” in reference to Mexican -American students, and references to “pee” 
and “baby crap,” taken together, did not constitute immoral conduct. ( Hensey, supra,  9 
Cal.App.3d at p.  974.)  
On the other hand, the Hensey  court deem ed to be immoral conduct the 
teacher’s gesture of licking a classroom wall with his tongue in an up -and-down 
manner , specifically directing his gesture to the County Superintendent of Schools. 
(Hensey, supra,  9 Cal.App.3d at p.  974.) The court stated “here, we have passed the 
limits of bad taste and vulgarity . . . this obscene incident  indicates both ‘immorality’ 
and ‘evident unfitness.’”  (Id., pp. 974 -975.)  
Finally, in Governing Board v. Haar  (1994) 28 Cal.App.4th 369, 378 -385, the 
court concluded a teacher engaged in immoral conduct by sexually harassing female 
students; offer ing students raffle tickets in exchange for sitting on his lap at a 
Christmas party; rubbing  a student's thigh in a sexual manner ; hugg ing another 
student; t elling  a student she was cute ; and t elling  another student she was so cute 
that when she went to high school she would have to take mace.  
In this case, the Statement of Charges allege s that Employee  created  at least 
three videos using artificial intelligence  (AI) (links are embedded in the Statement of 
Charges) and sent them to a colleague with no explanation. The ALJ reviewed the 
videos linked to the Statement of Charges. O ne video depicted a man ( the parties 
indicate it is Employee ) on a basketball court in athletic attire and an explosion in the 
background. The second video depicts two men in athletic attire , one of which is 
Employee,  standing near  a boxing or wrestling ring surrounded by an audience , and an 
explosion in the background. The third video depicts three men in athletic attire, on e 5 of which is Employee,  on an athletic field , with an explosion in the background.  The 
videos do not have sound.  
The Statement of Charges alleges:  
1. On May 13, 2025, at approximately 10:46 a.m., 
Principal Richard Waters (Principal Waters) of Beverly Vista 
Middle School  (Beverly Vista) contacted the District Office 
to report videos involving Respondent [Employee]. The 
videos were brought to Principal Waters’ attention by 
another certificated staff member at Beverly Vista who 
expressed concerns regarding the content of a series of 
videos he had received from Respondent.  
2. Specifically, one of the videos depicted Respondent 
[Employee] standing in front of a school resembling Beverly 
Vista while the school structure exploded behind him. Other 
videos included Respondent [Employee] with some of his 
colleagues exploding at a school site and a sporting event. 
The videos were highly detailed. [Link inserted here]  
[¶. . . ¶]  
10. District Assistant Superintendent of Business, Jason 
Hasty, immediately placed Respondent [Employee] on paid administrative leave on May 13, 2025. Respondent 
[Employee] subsequently sent multiple additional videos to 
Assistant Superintendent Hasty. These videos included depictions of explosions on school grounds and facilities, 6 individuals disintegrating into ash, violent scenes, and 
surreal simulations involving District- related imagery and 
other District employees.  
11. Respondent [Employee] shared the videos with at 
least one other District employee without warning or 
context, and created significant concern among District 
staff, requiring administrative intervention and involvement.  
12. Respondent’s  [Employee’s]  conduct caused 
significant concern, emotional distress, and disruption 
among staff, and was wholly inconsistent with the standards 
of conduct required of certificated employees working in 
proximity to children and fellow staff.  
13. On June 13, 2025, the District filed for a workplace 
violence restraining order under Code of Civil Procedure section 527.8, Los Angeles Superior Court Case No. 
25STR)03488. The court granted a temporary restraining 
order (TRO) prohibiting Mr. Kurnik [Emp loyee] from coming 
within 100 yards of any District site or contacting District 
employees.  
[¶. . . ¶]  
19. Respondent’s [Employee’s] conduct descri bed herein 
was morally indifferent and corrupt, inimical to the ethical 
standards and expectations of District employees. 
Respondent [Employee] knew, or should have known, that 7 sharing videos showing school facilities exploding, and co -
workers dissolving into ash without warning or context 
would cause fear and concern. Specifically, Respondent 
[Employee] was known to have a history of conflicts with 
colleagues and students, and has been emotional and 
unstable.  
20. By creating and distributing a digitally fabricated 
video that depicts the violent destruction of school 
grounds, Respondent [Employee] trivialized and simulated 
an act of mass violence in the very setting where students 
and staff are legal ly entitled to feel safe.  
21. Respondent’s [Employee’s] conduct was deliberate, 
premeditated, and visual in nature, and sent to at least one colleague.  
22. Respondent [Employee] knew, or reasonably should 
have known, that fabricating and transmitting imagery of 
violence against a school site is not a subject to “mess 
around” with and that all District employees have a 
responsibility to report threats to the safety of school 
ground s and the learning environment.  
None of the allegations in the Statement of Charges rise to the level of 
immorality discussed in the cases cited above.  For example, the allegations do not 
involve dishonest conduct such as found in 
Weiland ; prurient comments or actions 
done in bad taste as found in Hensey ; the sexual harassment found in Haar; or 8 otherwise equate to the kind of shocking, corrupt, indecent, depraved, dissolute, 
flagrant, or shameless conduct generally defined in the case law . The essential 
allegations are that Employee created A I videos which depicted employee alone 
and/or with others at locations that resembled school athletic events with explosions 
in the background and shared those videos with a colleague. District has failed to 
sufficiently plead cause for suspension for immoral conduct.  
The conclusory characterization of Employee’s conduct as set forth in the 
Statement of Charges is insufficient to establish immoral conduct for purpose s of the 
motion.  
Conclusion 
Good cause exists to grant the motion . 
Pursuant to Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(5), this order shall 
become effective within five days of service, and District shall make Employee whole for any lost wages, benefits, and compensation within 14 days after service of the order.  
IT IS SO ORDERED.  
DATE:   
GLYNDA B. GOMEZ  
Administrative Law Judge  
Office of Administrative Hearings  
 
09/16/2025