BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 
Suspension Filed by: 
JONATHAN SHERIFF, Moving Party, 
v. 
LOS ANGELES UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, Responding Party. 
OAH No. 2025050331 
ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 
SUSPENSION 
(Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(4)) 
Administrative Law Judge Karen Reichmann, State of California, Office of 
Administrative Hearings, heard this matter on May 30, 2025, by videoconference. 
Attorney Daniel J. Kolodziej represented Jonathan Sheriff, the moving party, 
who was present. 
Attorney Kelly Kim represented the Los Angeles Unified School District (District). 2 Procedural History 
A statement of charges was filed and served against Jonathan Sheriff, pursuant 
to Education Code sections 44932 and 44939, alleging several causes for dismissal, 
including immoral conduct and willful refusal to perform regular assignments without 
reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and regulations of the School 
District (willful refusal). The District placed Sheriff on immediate suspension without 
pay, pursuant to Education Code section 44939, based upon the allegations of 
immoral conduct and willful refusal.  
Sheriff filed a timely motion for immediate reversal of his suspension without 
pay, pursuant to Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1). He argues that the 
District has not alleged a sufficient basis to place him on immediate unpaid status 
because the factual allegations in the statement of charges do not establish that he 
engaged in immoral conduct or willful refusal. The District opposes the motion. 
Discussion 
Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b), provides that a school district 
may immediately suspend a permanent certificated employee who has been charged 
turpitude, with incompetency due to mental disability, with willful refusal to perform 
regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and 
 
gener
rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; or as willful, 
flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral indifference to the opinions of 3 respecta  (1960) 197 
Cal.App.2d 808, 811.) 
motion filed pursuant to this section shall be limited to a determination as to whether 
the facts as alleged in the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a 
 
Sheriff was employed as a secondary teacher for the District. The statement of 
charges alleges, in part, that between August 2022 and December 2023, while working 
at two different schools, Sheriff: used a racial slur in class, made inappropriate and 
sexually suggestive statements towards female students and staff, and engaged in 
unwelcome touching of female staff. The District alleges that these actions constituted 
immoral conduct and, because they violated District polices and oral and written 
directives, also constituted willful refusal. Sheriff contends that the conduct, as alleged 
and without further context or evidence of improper intent, does not rise to the level 
of immoral conduct. Sheriff also contends that mere failure to adhere to vague District 
polices cannot constitute willful refusal. 
The written submissions and oral argument of the parties have been considered. 
Based upon a review of the statement of charges, the District has alleged facts 
sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension under Education Code section 
44939, subdivision (b), on the basis of immoral conduct and willful refusal. 
 4ORDER
Jonathan Sheriff motion for immediate reversal of suspension is denied. The 
is upheld.
DATE:
KAREN REICHMANN
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings
