BEFORE THE  
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS  
STATE OF CALIFORNIA  
In the Matter of  the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 
Suspension of : 
DONALD LEE , Moving Party  
v. 
SACRAMENTO CITY UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, Responding 
Party  
OAH No. 2025071105  
ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 
SUSPENSION  
Administrative Law Judge  Traci C. Belmore, Office of Administrative Hearings  
(OAH) , State of California, heard oral argument on this matter on August  29, 20 25, by 
videoconference.  
Katrina Gould, Langenkamp, Curtis & Price, LLP, represented moving party,  
Donald Lee.  
Seth Eckstein , Fagen, Friedman, & Fulfrost, LLP,  represented responding party, 
Sacramento City Unified School District (district).  2 The record was closed , and the matter was submitted for decision on August 29, 
2025 . 
Background  
1. On July 1, 2025, the district’s Chief Human Resources Officer and Lead 
Negotiator signed Notice of Intent to Dismiss, Placement on Immediate Unpaid 
Suspension Pending Outcome of Disciplinary Proceedings, and Statement of Charges (Statement of Charges)  seeking the immediate suspension without pay and dismissal 
of Donald Lee, a permanent certificated employee.  Mr. Lee was served with the 
Statement of Charges on that date.  
2. The Statement of Charges alleges the following causes for dismissal: 
immoral conduct, dishonesty, evident unfitness for service and persistent violation of or refusal to obey state school laws or regulations prescribed by the district’s governing board. (Ed. Code, § 44932, subds . (a)(1), (a)(4), (a)(6) & (a)(8).)
0F1 The 
Statement of Charges also notified Mr. Lee of the district’s intent to immediately 
suspend him without pay based on immoral conduct . (§ 44939, subd. (b).)  
3. On July 30, 2025 , Mr. Lee  filed a Motion for Immediate Reversal of 
Suspension (motion) with OAH, pursuant to  Section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), alleging 
that the Statement of Charges  does not set forth facts sufficient to support an 
allegation of immoral conduct , which is necessary in this case to sustain the 
suspension.  The district filed an opposition to the motion on August 18, 2025.  
 
1 All future statutory references are to the Education Code.  3 4. On August 29, 2025, a videoconference was held, during which the 
parties were invited to present any additional oral arguments.  
Allegations in the Statement of Charges  
5. The allegations in the Statement of Charges relate solely to Mr. Lee’s  
conduct as a tenth grade English teacher at John F. Kennedy High School . The relevant 
factual allegations cited in the Statement of Charges  are as follows.  
6. On several occasions, Mr. Lee called students “bitches” while in the 
classroom.  
7. On August 21, 2024, Mr. Lee called a student a “bitch” after she refused 
to raise her hand in class.  
8. On August 22, 2024, Mr. Lee told the students “ If you ask me a question 
like ‘What’s my dick size’, I’m going to say I don’t know. But if you ask my favorite 
sexual position, I’m going to be like ‘ask your mom.’”  
9. Mr. Lee used  profanity and had a “ reputation  among students for using 
excessively foul language.”  
10. On August 19, 2024, Mr. Lee refused to allow a student to use the 
restroom until the student exhibited evidence of extreme discomfort.  
11. On September 11, 2024, the district interviewed Mr. Lee  regarding the 
allegations above. Mr. Lee admitted that he used profanity in the classroom and acknowledged that it was a “problem.” He denied making any comment about his 
penis.  When specifically asked if he made the statement about asking the students ’ 
mother about his favorite sexual position, Mr. Lee “answered obliquely” that he did 4 “use ‘your momma’ jokes ” when students ask questions that are unrelated to the 
curriculum.  Mr. Lee admitted th at he has refused to allow students to use the 
restroom.  The district concluded that Mr. Lee’s denial s were not credible.  
The Parties’ Arguments  
12. Mr. Lee argued that the Statement of Charges does not cite any behavior 
that rises to the level of immoral conduct  and states that the only published cases 
sustaining immoral  conduct involved “sexual misconduct, drugs, fraud or other 
intentional  criminal conduct, and intention discrimination against students based on a 
protected class.”  Mr. Lee then attempts to distinguish Crawford v. Commission on 
Professional Competence (2020) 53 Cal.App.5th  327, which held that immoral conduct 
is not limited to those categories, by stating that Crawford  involved conduct that 
“garnered widespread national medi a attention, generated outrage in the community 
and hundreds  of complaints to the school district.”  He cites two cases to support his 
contention that his conduct does not rise to the level of immoral conduct.  
13. The district  argued that it had pled facts in the Statement of Charges that 
constitute a basis for Mr. Lee’s immediate suspension for immoral conduct  also citing 
Crawford . The district argue d that Mr. Lee ’s conduct  “not only negatively effec ts 
students but it ruins the foundation of trust between teacher and student .” The district 
maintained that in making “sexually suggestive  comments to students and using 
profanity when speaking to students” Mr. Lee created a “harmful, unsafe, and 
unwelcoming environment”  rendering him unfi t to teach and justifying his immediate 
suspension on ground s of immoral conduct.  5 14. In reply and during oral argument, Mr.  Lee argued that while his conduct 
was certainly objectionable and may even have been unprofessional it did not 
constitute immoral conduct.  
Applicable Law  
15. Section 44939, subdivision (b), authorizes the district to suspend an 
employee without pay pending the outcome of the hearing if the district charges 
immoral conduct. Subdivision (c)(1), allows the employee to file a motion for relief 
from the suspension and requires review of this motion to be “limited to a 
determination as to whether the facts as alleged in the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension under this section.”  
Evaluation  
16. A review of a motion to reverse immediate suspension is limited to 
whether the facts as alleged in the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute immoral conduct.  
17. There is broad discretion in determining what constitutes immoral 
conduct in the context of teacher disciplinary matters. (
California Teachers Association 
v. State of California  (1999) 20 Cal.4th 327.) Immoral conduct has been defined by the 
courts as follows:  
[T]hat which is hostile to the welfare of the general public 
and contrary to good morals. Immorality has not been 
confined to sexual matters, but includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, 
indecency, depravity, dissoluteness ; or as wilful, flagrant, or 6 shameless conduct showing moral indifference to the 
opinions of respectable members of the community, and as 
an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public 
welfare. ( Palo Verde etc. School Dist. v. Hensey  (1970) 9 
Cal.App.3d 967, 972, citing Bd. of Education of San 
Francisco Unified School Dist. v. Weiland , 179 Cal. App 2d 
808, 811.)  
18. Immoral conduct alone cannot serve as a basis to terminate a teacher 
unless the conduct indicates the teacher is also unfit to teach. ( Palo Verde, supra,  at p. 
972.) The definition of immoral or unprofessional conduct must be considered in 
conjunction with the unique position of public -school  teachers, upon whom are 
imposed “responsibilities and limitations on freedom of action which do not exist in 
regard to other callings.” ( Board of Trustees v. Stubblefield, 16 Cal.App.3d 820, 824.)  
19. In Crawford, supra , at p. 337, the court rejected Ms. Crawford’s 
contention that  there are three fixed categories of conduct that constitute  “immoral 
conduct” as a matter of law . Instead , the court held the  term “immoral conduct” in 
Section 44932, “stretch[es] over so wide a range” of conduct that it “embrace[s] an 
unlimited area of conduct.” ( Ibid., citing Morrison v. State Board of Education  (1969) 1 
Cal.3d 214, 224- 225.) Citing Morrison, supra, at p. 224, the court added, the term must 
be “‘considered in  the context in which the Legislature considered it, as conduct which 
is hostile to the welfare of the general public  . . . more specifically in this case,  conduct 
which is hostile to the welfare of the school community. ’”[citations] ( Crawford,  at p. 
337 [italics in original].) “ A teacher's conduct is therefore “immoral” under  section 
44932, subdivision (a)(1) , when it negatively affects the school community in a way 
that demonstrates the teacher is ‘ unfit to teach. ’” (Ibid. [footnote omitted].) The court 7 then addressed Ms. Crawford’s argument that the term s hould be given a colloquial 
interpretation that includes only conduct that would be deemed “immoral” in an 
everyday sense, such as criminal activity and using profanity or racial epithets . (Id. at p. 
338.) The court wrote : 
We disagree. Immoral conduct “ stretch[es] over so wide a 
range that [it] embrace[s] an unlimited area of conduct. ” 
([Morrison, supra , at pp. 224 -225].) Thus, “ the proper criteria 
is fitness to teach ” because the term “immoral conduct ” is 
“so broad and vague ” that it is “ constitutionally  infirm. ” 
([citation].) ( Ibid.) 
20. The district alleges in the Statement of Charges that Mr. Lee called 
multiple students  “bitch ,” refused to allow a student to go to the restroom until the 
student exhibited extreme discomfort, and made lewd, sexual comments in class.  
Accordingly, under the rationale of Crawford , because immoral conduct could 
“embrace an unlimited area of conduct ,” the fact that there are no reported cases 
upholding immoral conduct similar to the factual situation of this case, does not, as a 
matter of law, preclude the C ommission on Professional Competence (C PC) from 
finding immoral conduct in this case. So long as the CPC could, after application of the 
Morrison factors, find that Mr. Lee’s c onduc t negatively  affect ed the school community 
in a way that demonstrates he  is “unfit to teach .” 
Mr. Lee’s motion must be denied. The parties’ written submissions and oral 
arguments having been considered, the district alleged sufficient facts in the Statement of Charges that, if true, could constitute immoral conduct and support immediate suspension under section 44939, subdivision (b).  8 ORDER  
The motion for immediate reversal of suspension is denied.  
 
DATE:  September 8, 2025  
TRACI C. BELMORE  
Administrative Law Judge  
Office of Administrative Hearings  
 
