BEFORE THE  
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS  
STATE OF CALIFORNIA  
In the Matter of  the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 
Suspension of : 
CHARITY GUPTILL, Moving Party,  
A Permanent Certificated Employee,  
and 
PALERMO UNION ELEMENTARY SCHOOL DISTRICT, 
Responding Party.  
OAH No. 2025110060  
ORDER GRANTING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 
SUSPENSION  
Administrative Law Judge Mary Agnes Matyszewski, Office of Administrative 
Hearings (OAH), State of California, heard oral argument on this  matter on November 
21, 2025, by videoconference.  
Katrina Gould, Attorney at Law, Langenkamp Curtis Price Lindstrom & 
Chevedden, LLP , represented moving party, Charity Guptill .  
 2 Christian Keiner, Attorney at Law, Dannis Woliver Kelley , represented Palermo 
Union Elementary  School District  (district).  
The parties’ oral arguments were heard, and the matter was submitted on 
November 21, 2025.  
Motion for Immediate Reversal of Suspension  
A school district may immediately suspend without pay a permanent certificated 
employee charged with immoral conduct  or charged with willful refusal to perform 
regular assignments without reasonable cause as prescribed by reasonable rules and 
regulations of the district . (Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (b).) A suspended employee may 
file a motion for immediate reversal of the suspension with OAH. (Ed. Code, § 44939, 
subd. (c)(1).) An administrative judge’s review of the suspended employee’s motion 
shall be “limit ed to a determination as to whether the facts as alleged in the Statement 
of Charges , if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension under 
this section.” (Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(1).)  
Although the administrative law judge must accept well -pleaded facts in the 
Statement of Charges  as true, the administrative law judge need not accept 
contentions, deductions, or conclusions of fact or law. ( Blank v. Kirwan  (1985) 39 Cal.3d 
311, 318.) Conclusory characterizations of conduct as intentional, willful, or fraudulent 
are “patently insufficient.” ( Brousseau v. Jarrett  (1977) 73 Cal.App.3d 864, 872.) Where 
reading the allegations reveals the existence of an affirmative defense, the 
complaining par ty must plead around the defense by alleging specific facts that would 
avoid the apparent defense. ( Blank, supra,  39 Cal.3d at p. 318.)   
 3 On October 31, 2025, Ms. Guptil l filed her Motion for Immediate Reversal of 
Suspension with OAH, pursuant to Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1). 
OAH set the matter for oral argument and established a briefing schedule.  
Statement of Charges 
On October 1, 2025,  the district filed the Statement of Charges  and Notice of 
Suspension seeking the immediate suspension without pay and dismiss al of Ms. 
Guptil l, a permanent certificated employee. Ms. Guptil l is a teacher and Preschool Site 
Supervisor at a preschool licensed by the California Department of Social Services 
(department) . Attendance at the preschool is voluntary and requires attendees to 
monthly pay fees  to attend. As a department licensee, the preschool is regulated by 
California Code of Re gulations, title 22.  As required , the preschool must provide care 
and supervision as necessary to meet the children’s needs and no child may be left without supervision of a  teacher at any time, which includes visual observation, except 
in certain limited situations not applicable here. (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 22, § 101229.)   
The district alleged that on June 27, 2025, Ms. Guptil l left Student A, then four 
years old, locked in the classroom when she and others left with the preschool 
students for a field trip. Student A was not discovered to be missing during the 
headcount when  everyone boarded the bus for the field trip.  When students were 
recounted at the destination, Student A was discovered missing. The district alleged 
when Ms. Gupti ll returned to campus she was “shaken up” and “frazzled” and “not 
maintaining a ‘calm and collected demeanor’ in relating to Student A.”  
The district’s investigation determined Ms. Guptil l failed to conduct an accurate 
and verified headcount, failed to take roll prior to leaving on the bus, and failed to 
ensure all students were accounted for prior to departure.  The investigation found  
 4 further: “D espite identifying a discrepancy in the count (15 instead of 16) , [Ms. Gupti ll] 
proceeded  to leave campus based on unverified counts by others. The failure to 
confirm attendance, lack of direct supervision, and reliance on aides along with the 
admission of distraction and lack of preparation, demonstrate gross negligence. ” As a 
result of the incident, the district was required to submit a report of an unusual 
incident to the department which led to the department issuing a citation. The district was also required to submit a report to Child Protective Services.  
The Statement of Charges  alleged further that previously on April 18, 2024, the 
district issued a letter of reprimand to Ms. Guptil l for her conduct that occurred on 
April 16, 2024, as follows: Ms. Guptil l was using her cell phone to text repeatedly while 
supervising a child ; repeatedly failed to keep that child in view ; took that child to an  
area on campus that was open to the public and where exterior gates were opened to 
a busy street and parking lot;  and her conduct violated California Code of Regulatio ns, 
title 22, section 101229.  The letter of reprimand advised Ms. Guptil l that her conduct 
adversely impacted the child ’s safety, exposed the district to possible liability, and 
adversely impacted the child’s personal rights.  
The Statement of Issues further alleged that the district issued a letter of 
reprimand to Ms. Guptil l on November 6, 2024, f or her failure to supervise children in 
care because she was on her cell phone , repeatedly failed to keep children in view,  and 
because at pickup she failed to confirm the identification of an adult whom she had 
never met and  who was not on the pickup list , putting the child at risk of leaving with 
an unauthorized adult.  The letter of reprimand advised Ms. Guptil l that effective 
immediately , she was to follow district, T itle 22 , and Title 5 procedures  and properly 
supervise students in care, ensure their safe departure, and verify adults ’ identities .  
 5 The Statement of Charges  contained several grounds for dismissal: immoral 
conduct, unprofessional conduct, evident unfitness for service, persistent violation of 
or refusal to obey the school laws of the state or reasonable regulations prescribed for 
the government of the public schools  by the state board or by the governing board of 
the school district . (Ed. Code, §§ 44932, subds . (a)(1), (a)(2), (a)(6), & (a)(8).) The district 
suspended Ms. Guptil l without pay pending a hearing before a Commission on 
Professional Competence.  
Of note, the Statement of Charges  incorrectly referenced Education Code 
section 4 8932, subdivision (a)( 1), for the immoral conduct charge, but section 48932 
pertains to student organizations and does not contain subdivisions . Presumably the 
district meant section 44932, subdivision (a)(1), the section for immoral conduct.   
Parties’ Arguments  
Ms. Guptil l asserted that her conduct , including her reliance on aides and 
leaving Student A behind did not rise to level of immoral conduct . Further, she argue d 
that the district’s assertions regarding her frantic behavior when she returned to the 
site supports her position that this was a situation she took seriously.  She further 
assert ed that the two incidents which led to the letters of reprimand involve d times 
when she was distracted and failed to check proper identification,  but, again, do not 
rise the level of immoral conduct.  Ms. Gupti ll also argued that the district did not 
allege willful refusal to perform her assignments  in the Statement of Charges .  
The district asserted that Ms. Gupti ll’s actions constituted immoral conduct, 
noting the high moral standards that teachers must possess because they are entrusted to care for children. The district cite d to several cases which found the 
teacher’s actions constituted immoral conduct, arguing that Ms. Guptil l’s actions f ell  
 6 within the types of acts referenced. The district argued that it was cited because of Ms. 
Guptil l’s actions and faces the possibility that the preschool may be shut down. The 
district also argue d that Ms. Gupti ll’s acts of  willfully le aving the school site without 
conducting a proper headcount constitutes willful conduct  supporting her unpaid 
suspension.  The district asserted it did allege willful refusal to perform assignments in 
the Statement of Charges.  
Immoral Conduct Analysis  
There is broad discretion in determining what constitutes immoral conduct in 
the context of teacher disciplinary matters. ( California Teachers Association v. State of 
California  (1999) 20 Cal.4th 327.)  The definition of immoral conduct must be 
considered in conjunction with the unique position of public school teachers, upon 
whom are imposed “responsibilities and limitations on freedom of action which do not exist in regard to other callings.” (
Board of Trustees v. Stubblefield  (1971)  16 
Cal.App.3d 820, 824; San Diego Unified School Dist rict v. Com mission  on Professional 
Competence (2011) 194 Cal.App.4th 1454, 1466.)  
Immoral conduct is not considered in the abstract but must be considered in 
the context in which the Legislature considered it, as conduct which is hostile to the 
welfare of the general public; more specifically, conduct which is hostile to the welfare 
of the school community.  (Morrison v. State Board of Education  (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 
224; Crawford v. Comm ission  on Professional  Competence (2020) 53 Cal.App.5th 339, 
337.)  It has been defined as that which is hostile to the welfare of the general public 
and c ontrary to good morals.  It has not been limited  to sexual matters, but includes 
conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, 
dissoluteness; or as wilful , flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral indifference 
to the opinions of respectable members of the community, and as an inconsiderate  
 7 attitude toward good order and the public welfare.  (Board of Ed ucation  of San 
Francisco Unified School Dis trict v. Weiland  (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811; Palo Verde 
etc. School Dist rict v. Hensey (1970) 9 Cal.App.3d 967, 972 .) 
Having considered the pleadings, written submission s, and oral arguments , the 
district did not allege facts which, if true, could  constitute immoral conduct , as that 
term has been defined,  and are insufficient to establish a basis for immediate 
suspension under Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b) . At best, Ms. Guptil l’s 
actions were negligent, she made a gr ave mistake, but the facts do not support a 
finding that her actions were depraved, indecent, corrupt, willful, flagrant or shameful, 
or were t he type of actions the case law references. In fact, the district’s own 
investigation determined Ms. Gupti ll committed  three failures . Although the district  
concluded her actions constituted gross negligence, the administrative law judge need 
not accept that conclusion. ( Blank , supra .) Here, the facts show Ms. Guptil l made a 
mistake , a finding further supported by the reference in the Statement of Charges to 
Ms. Guptil l’s demeanor  when she returned to campus . While she does have two  letters 
of reprimand in 2024 for he r failure to properly supervise children, those past incidents 
also showed negligence and not immoral conduct.   
Willful Violation Analysis  
The District did not charge  Ms. Guptil l with willful refusal as a cause for 
termination; instead, the district charged h er persistent violation of or refusal to obey 
the school laws of the state or reasonable regulations prescribed for the government 
of the public schools by the state board or by the governing board of the school district employing her u nder Education Code s ection 44932, subdivision (a)(8), which is 
not a basis to immediately suspend Ms. Guptil l. The district asserts it has “more that 
sufficiently alleged facts supporting suspension on grounds of her willful refusal to  
 8 perform her regular assignments without reasonable cause.” The district cites to the 
various documents given to Ms. Guptil l in support of its position. It argues that Ms. 
Guptil l’s failure to follow those directives, policies, etc., show she willfully refused to 
comply. Based on a fair reading of Education Code s ection 44939, subdivision (b) , the 
district’s argument is not persuasive.  
The use of the “charging” in subdivision (b) is a clear expression of legislative 
intent that requires a district to charge the teacher with the conduct that is the basis to immed iately suspend him or her. The dictionary definition of “charge” is: “to make an 
assertion against by ascribing guilt or blame” or “to assert as an accusation.” (www.merriam -webster.com/dictionary/charge .) To conclude that a district does not 
need to charge  a teacher with the conduct that is the basis of the immediate 
suspension , would render the word “charging” in Education Code s ection 44939, 
subdivision (b), superfluous and meaningless. (‘“In analyzing statutory language, we seek to give meaning to every word and phrase in the statute to accomplish a result 
consistent with the legislative purpose.  . . .”’ (
California Teachers Assn. v. Governing B d. 
of Rialto Unified School District  (1997) 14 Cal. 4th 627 at p. 634 (citations omitted).) 
Accordingly, b ecause the d istrict d id not charge Ms. Guptil l with “willful refusal,” 
the district is not authorized under Education Code s ection 44939, subdivision (b), to 
immediately suspend h er and may not suspend her without pay. Due to this 
conclusion, it is unnecessary to address whether the allegations contained in the 
Statement of Charges are sufficient to allege willful refusal.   
 9 ORDER  
Good cause having been established, the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 
Suspension is GRANTED . The district’s immediate suspension of Ms. Guptil l is 
OVERTURNED . The district shall immediately return Ms. Guptil l to paid status. The 
district shall make Ms. Guptil l whole for any lost wages, benefits, and compensation 
within 14 days after service of this Order. (Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(5).)   
 
DATE:  November 25, 2025  
 
  
 
MARY AGNES MATYSZEWSKI  
Administr ative Law Judge  
Office of Administrative Hearing s
 
Mary Agnes Matyszewski (Nov 25, 2025 15:50:29 PST)Mary Agnes Matyszewski