BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 
Suspension of: 
TERESA TAYLOR, 
a Permanent Certificated Employee, 
Moving Party, 
v. 
BURTON SCHOOL DISTRICT, 
Responding Party. 
OAH No. 2025020384 
ORDER GRANTING MOTION FOR 
IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF SUSPENSION 
(Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(4)) 
Administrative Law Judge Michael C. Starkey, State of California, Office of 
Administrative Hearings, heard this matter on March 7, 2025, by videoconference. 2 Attorney Joshua F. Richtel represented moving party Teresa Taylor. 
Attorney Juliane S. Rossiter represented responding party Burton School District
(District). 
Procedural History
On January 13, 2025, the District filed and served a “NOTICE OF INTENT TO 
DISMISS; PLACEMENT ON UNPAID SUSPENSION PENDING DISCIPLINARY 
PROCEEDINGS; AND STATEMENT OF CHARGES” (Statement of Charges) against 
moving party Taylor, alleging multiple causes for dismissal, including immoral conduct, 
dishonesty, evident unfitness for service, and persistent violation of or refusal to obey 
the school laws of the state or reasonable regulations prescribed for the government 
of the public school by the state board or by the governing board of the school district 
employing her, pursuant to Education Code section 44932, subdivisions (a)(1), (3), (6), 
and (8). The District placed Taylor on immediate suspension without pay pending 
hearing, pursuant to Education Code section 44939, based upon the charge of 
immoral conduct. At hearing, the District argued that it had also alleged willful refusal 
to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause as a basis for suspension, 
but this basis was not specified in the Statement of Charges. 
On February 12, 2025, Taylor timely filed a motion for immediate reversal of her
suspension without pay pursuant to Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(4), 
arguing that the District has not alleged a sufficient basis to place her on immediate 
unpaid status because the allegations in the statement of charges do not state 
sufficient facts to constitute immoral conduct. In her motion, Taylor requests an order 
reversing her suspension without pay.3 Discussion
Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b), provides, in relevant part, that a 
school district may immediately suspend a permanent employee of the school district 
who has been charged “with immoral conduct, conviction of a felony or of any crime 
involving moral turpitude, with incompetency due to mental disability, with willful 
refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable cause, as prescribed by 
reasonable rules and regulations of the employing school district, or with violation of 
Section 51530 . . . .”
Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), authorizes the permanent 
employee to seek review of the order of suspension by motion to the Office of 
Administrative Hearings. This section limits the review of a motion to immediately 
reverse a suspension to “a determination as to whether the facts as alleged in the 
statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate 
suspension under this section.”
The written submissions of the parties and their oral argument have been 
considered. Based upon a review of the charges, the District has not alleged facts 
which, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension under 
Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b), on the grounds of immoral conduct, or 
on the grounds of willful refusal to perform regular assignments without reasonable 
cause. 
ORDER 
Teresa Taylor’s motion for immediate reversal of suspension of is granted. The 
Burton School District’s immediate suspension of Teresa Taylor is reversed. The District 4 shall make her whole for any lost wages, benefits, and compensation within 14 days 
after service of this Order. (Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(5).)
DATE:
MICHAEL C. STARKEY
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings
