BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINSTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 
Suspension of: 
SONJA TRAVICK, 
a Permanent Certificated Employee, 
Moving Party, 
and 
OAKLAND UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, 
Responding Party. 
OAH No. 2025051142 
ORDER GRANTING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 
SUSPENSION 
Administrative Law Judge Deena R. Ghaly, Office of Administrative Hearings 
(OAH), State of California, heard this motion hearing by videoconference on June 20, 
2025. 2 Attorney Clarissa M. Romero, Beeson Tayer & Bodine represented moving party 
Sonja Travick (Respondent). Jessica S. McLaughlin, Lozano Smith, represented 
responding party Oakland Unified School District (District). 
BACKGROUND
Since 1993, respondent has been a permanent certificated employee of the 
District. She is currently a dance teacher at Oakland Technical High School (Oakland 
Tech). 
On February 28, 2025, the District issued a Statement of Charges alleging, 
among other charges, respondent was liable for immoral conduct, as the term is 
defined by Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(1) (further statutory cites are 
to the Education Code unless otherwise designated) and persistent violation of, and 
refusal to obey applicable laws or the District’s or the school board’s regulations 
(willful refusal), as the term is defined by section 44932, subdivision (a)(8). The charges 
against respondent resulting in her suspension stem from the District’s allegations that 
she drove on campus at an unreasonable speed and through a group of students in 
her path, driving over the foot of one of the students.
After a preliminary hearing known as a Hearing, on May 19, 2025, the 
District issued to respondent a Notice of Intent to Dismiss and Placement on 
Immediate Unpaid Suspension. Thereafter, respondent was placed on unpaid leave.
Respondent demanded a hearing on the dismissal and filed a motion for 
immediate reversal of the suspension (MIRS) under Education Code section 44939, 
subdivision (c)(1). The District filed opposition to the motion, and counsel for both 
parties presented oral argument at the motion hearing.3 Respondent’s Arguments
Respondent asserts the SOC’s factual allegations, even if true, are insufficient to 
constitute a basis for immediate suspension without pay. Respondent contends the 
District’s allegation does not fall into any of the typical types of conduct considered to 
be immoral conduct, inappropriate sexual activity, drug use or possession, and theft. 
Further, the allegation does not establish whether the act in question was intentional 
or accidental. If accidental, the alleged act would not establish unfitness to teach, a 
necessary element of actionable immoral conduct in the context of teacher discipline 
proceedings. 
Regarding the willful refusal charge, Respondent asserts the District failed to 
properly plead it as grounds for placing Respondent on an unpaid suspension because 
the facts as pled do not establish a willful state of mind to violate school rules, a 
necessary element of the willful refusal charge. 
The District’s Arguments 
The District asserts the acts it alleges respondent committed constitute immoral 
conduct because it was unsafe and harmful conduct. The District disagrees that, for 
purposes of teacher discipline proceedings, immoral conduct is limited to certain 
categories and cited several cases noting teachers’ heightened standards of 
accountability. According to the District, respondent “utterly ignored ordinary caution, 
exhibited dangerous driving habits, and directly endangered students as they walked 
on their school campus.” (District’s Opposition to Motion for Immediate Reversal of 
Suspension, p. 4.) Further, the District argues that, whether respondent’s act was 
accidental is of no consequence since driving itself is an intentional act. 4 Analysis
A school district may immediately suspend without pay a permanent certificated 
employee who has been charged with ”immoral conduct, conviction of a felony or of 
any crime involving moral turpitude, with incompetency due to mental disability, with 
[willful refusal] or with advocating communism.” (§ 44939, subd. (b).) 
Suspended teachers may file a motion for immediate reversal of the suspension 
with the Office of Administrative Hearings. (§ 44939, subd. (c)(1).) An administrative law 
judge reviews the motion, and the review “shall be limited to a determination as to 
whether the facts as alleged in the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to 
constitute a basis for immediate suspension under this section.” ( ) In other words, 
to warrant immediate suspension, the alleged misconduct as pled in the statement of 
charges must constitute one of the enumerated causes for discipline set out in section 
44939, subdivision (b), as grounds for immediate suspension. These grounds include 
immoral conduct and willful refusal. (§ 44939, subd. (b).)
Immoral Conduct 
Immoral conduct is conduct “‘hostile to the welfare of the general public and 
contrary to good morals. Immorality has not been confined to sexual matters, but 
includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, 
depravity, dissoluteness; or as willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral 
indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the community, and as an 
inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public welfare.’” (
 (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811, quoting 
(1951) 36 Cal.2d 734, 740.) 5 The District has charged respondent with immoral conduct based on its 
contention respondent drove at an “unreasonable” speed on campus and over the 
foot of a student. The term unreasonable is too vague and broad to denote immorality 
even under the broad expanse of the term under the applicable case law. That 
respondent ran over a student’s foot, while unfortunate, can be nothing more than an 
accident; the District’s argument that, because driving is an intentional act, any 
resulting consequence cannot be an accident is unpersuasive and lacks common 
sense. Without more, the factual statement in the Statement of Charges does not on 
its face constitute immoral conduct. Therefore, it does not support an immediate 
suspension. 
The District’s charge of willful refusal does not identify “applicable laws or the 
District’s or the school board’s regulations” respondent allegedly violated. As such, the 
District failed to demonstrate a necessary element of the charge. Therefore, this 
grounds for suspension also fails. Under these circumstances, respondent’s MIRS is 
granted. 
ORDER 
Respondent’s motion for immediate reversal of suspension is granted. 
DATE:  
DEENA R. GHALY 
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings