BEFORE THE  
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS  
STATE OF CALIFORNIA  
In the Matter of  the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 
Suspension Filed by : 
MARTHA ELENA VALLEJO KAUFMAN , a Permanent 
Certificated Employee , 
v. 
SAN FRANCISCO  UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT . 
OAH No. 2025081034  
ORDER DENY ING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 
SUSPENSION  
(Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(4))  
Administrative Law Judge Carl D. Corbin , State of California, Office of 
Administrative Hearings, heard this m otion  by videoconference  on September 19, 
2025 . 
Moving party Martha Elena Vallejo Kaufman appeared representing herself . 2 Attorney Christine Lee  appear ed on behalf of the San Francisco  Unified School 
District (District).  
Proce dural History  
On July 30, 2025, a statement of charges was filed and served against Martha 
Elena Vallejo Kaufman, pursuant to Education Code section s 44932 and 44939, alleging 
a total of three causes for dismissal, including immoral conduct and willful refusal  to 
perform r egular assignments without reasonable cause  as prescribed by reasonable 
rules and regulations  of the District  (willful refusal) . The District placed Kaufman on 
immediate suspension without pay, pursuant to Education Code section 44939, based 
upon  the immor al conduct and willful refusal allegations.  
Kaufman  filed a motion for immediate reversal of her suspension without pay, 
pursuant to Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1) . She argues that the 
District has not alleged a sufficient basis to place h er on immediate unpaid status 
because : the allegations in the statement of charges lack factual support ; there was a 
violation of due process  because she was not provided union representation ; the 
investigation into the facts underlying the statemen t of charges  was unfair and 
incomplete ; there are mitigating factors  that were disregarded ; and the penalty of 
dismissal is disproportionate to her misconduct.  
The District opposes the motion.  
Discussion  
Education Code section 44939, subdivision (b), provi des that a school district 
may immediately suspend a permanent certificated employee who has been charged 
with “immoral conduct “ and/or with “willful refusal to perform regular assignments 3 without reasonable cause, as prescribed by reasonable rules and reg ulations of t he 
employing school district .” 
Pursuant to Education Code section 44939, subdivision (c)(1), “ [r]eview of a 
motion filed pursuant to this section shall be limited to a determination as to whether 
the facts as alleged in the statement of charge s, if true, are sufficient to constitute a 
basis for immediate suspension under this section.”  
The written submissions and oral argument of the parties have been considered . 
The statement of charges contain s alleg ed facts that Kaufman twice spat on the fac e of 
a seven -year-old student  in violation of District Board policies, administrative 
regulations, the t eacher code of ethics, and the Education Code regarding discipline 
and treatment of students receiving special education services.  These acts, if proven, 
establish cause for discipline for immoral conduct and willful refusal.  
Based upon a review of the statement of charges, the District has allege d facts 
sufficient to constitute a basis for immediate suspension under Education Code s ection 
44939, subdivision (b) . 
// 
// 
// 
// 
// 
// 4 ORDER  
Martha Elena Vallejo Kaufman’s  motion for immediate reversal of suspension is 
denied . The District’s immediate suspension of Martha Elena Vallejo Kaufman  is 
upheld . 
 
DATE:   
CARL D. CORBIN  
Administrative Law Judge  
Office of Administrative Hearings  
 
    September 19, 2025