BEFORE THE 
OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
In the Matter of the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 
Suspension of:  
ULISES SANCHEZ-JIMENEZ, a Permanent Certificated 
Employee, 
Moving Party, 
and 
COACHELLA VALLEY UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT, 
Responding Party. 
OAH No. 2025030048 
ORDER DENYING MOTION FOR IMMEDIATE REVERSAL OF 
SUSPENSION 
Harden Sooper, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings 
(OAH), State of California, heard this matter by videoconference on March 28, 2025.
Jon Y. Vanderpool, Attorney at Law, represented moving party Ulises Sanchez-
Jimenez (Teacher). 2 Victor I. King and Denise Wong, Attorneys at Law, represented responding party
Coachella Valley Unified School District (District). 
The District has suspended Teacher without pay pending the outcome of its 
action to dismiss Teacher. The basis for the suspension under Education Code section 
44939 is immoral conduct. In his motion (Motion), Teacher seeks an order for the 
immediate reversal of his suspension. The District opposes the Motion. 
Counsel for both parties presented oral argument at the motion hearing. The 
parties did not dispute that the Statement of Charges, attached as Exhibit A to the 
Motion, is the operative pleading for this proceeding. 
Motion for Immediate Reversal of Suspension 
A school district may immediately suspend without pay a permanent certificated 
employee charged with immoral conduct. (Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (b).) A suspended 
employee may file a motion for immediate reversal of the suspension with OAH. (Ed. 
Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(1).) An administrative judge’s review of the suspended 
employee’s motion shall be “limited to a determination as to whether the facts as 
alleged in the statement of charges, if true, are sufficient to constitute a basis for 
immediate suspension under this section.” (Ed. Code, § 44939, subd. (c)(1).)
Although the administrative law judge must accept well-pleaded facts in the 
statement of charges as true, the administrative law judge need not accept 
contentions, deductions, or conclusions of fact or law. ( (1985) 39 Cal.3d 
311, 318.) Conclusory characterizations of conduct as intentional, willful, or fraudulent 
are “patently insufficient.” ( (1977) 73 Cal.App.3d 864, 872.) Where 
reading the allegations reveals the existence of an affirmative defense, the 3 complaining party must plead around the defense by alleging specific facts that would 
avoid the apparent defense. (  39 Cal.3d at p. 318.) 
Statement of Charges 
During the relevant period, Teacher was employed by District as a teacher at 
Desert Mirage High School. The Statement of Charges alleges Teacher engaged in 
immoral conduct in violation of Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(1), 
among other violations of the Education and Business and Professions Codes. 
The Statement of Charges sets forth 10 paragraphs detailing specific acts the 
District alleges constitute immoral conduct. 
Paragraph 1 alleges on February 16, 2024, Teacher instructed student G.C. to 
stay after class; closed the classroom door; scrolled through her phone without her 
permission; stroked and played with her hair; leaned over and placed his hand over 
G.C.’s hand while she was writing with a pencil, moving his hand back and forth and 
rubbing G.C.’s breast with his arm; and stared at G.C.’s chest while she was working 
and told G.C. he liked watching her work. 
Paragraph 2 alleges on February 20, 2024, when G.C. entered Teacher’s 
classroom, Teacher screamed and caused G.C. to become upset and scared. Teacher 
laughed and told G.C., “You’re scared of me.” Teacher passed by G.C.’s desk several 
times during the subsequent class period, staring at her chest and making her feel 
uncomfortable. 
Paragraph 3 alleges multiple incidents during the 2023–2024 school year in 
which Teacher inappropriately touched students, including: (1) grabbing student Y.P.’s 
hair, smelling it, and asking if Y.P. took a shower because she smelled really nice; (2) 4 grabbing a female student’s ponytail and making a windmill motion with it; and (3) 
rubbing student D.L.’s shoulders during class. 
Paragraph 4 alleges eight students reported Teacher touched students in ways 
that made them feel uncomfortable, including touching their shoulders, putting his 
arm around them, and hugging them. 
Paragraph 5 alleges Teacher often stared at female students, causing them to 
feel uncomfortable. 
Paragraph 6 alleges Teacher made multiple inappropriate comments to 
students during the 2023–2024 school year, including (1) calling a student a “little 
calientita,” or “little hot babe”; (2) telling a student “don’t get a boyfriend”; (3) joking 
that a student was trying to blow him a kiss; (4) telling a student she looked “really 
good” in her shirt and staring the student up and down; and (5) commenting on a 
student’s piercing. 
Paragraph 7 alleges Teacher held a student’s hand and took off her gloves and 
put the gloves back on and that Teacher grabbed a student’s drink and smelled it 
without the student’s permission. 
Paragraph 8 alleges Teacher made unprofessional comments and jokes, 
including (1) telling a student she needed to answer questions faster; (2) asking a 
student if they had “learning problems”; (3) mispronouncing a student’s name even 
after the student corrected Teacher several times; (4) calling a student “lazy”; and (5) 
joking about a student having lice. 
Paragraph 9 alleges Teacher asked students to stay after class, during lunch, or 
after school to make up tests or other assignments. On one occasion, a student 5 reported Teacher stood close to a female student who was finishing a test in the 
classroom. 
Paragraph 10 alleges Teacher was dishonest with the District when interviewed 
about these allegations. 
The District contends the foregoing conduct warrants Teacher’s immediate 
dismissal without pay. Teacher contends the District failed to plead sufficient facts to 
establish immoral conduct. Teacher concedes the District’s most serious allegation, 
that Teacher rubbed a student’s breast, constitutes immoral conduct if true. However, 
Teacher contends the District’s exhibits, incorporated into the Statement of Charges, 
do not support the allegation, citing student G.C.’s written complaint stating Teacher 
“almost touch[ed]” her breast. (Statement of Charges, Ex. 2.) 
Immoral Conduct 
“[T]he term ‘immoral conduct’ in section 44932, subdivision (a)(1) ‘stretch[es] 
over so wide a range’ of conduct that it ‘embrace[s] an unlimited area of conduct.’” 
(  (2020) 53 Cal.App.5th 327, 337 ( ), 
quoting (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 224-225.) Courts have 
defined immoral conduct in school settings as conduct “‘hostile to the welfare of the 
general public and contrary to good morals. Immorality has not been confined to 
sexual matters, but includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of 
corruption, indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; or as wil[l]ful, flagrant, or shameless 
conduct showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the 
community, and as an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public 6 welfare.’” (  ( ) (1960) 179 
Cal.App.2d 808, 811, quoting (1951) 36 Cal.2d 734, 740.)
Immoral conduct also “must be considered in conjunction with the unique 
position of public school teachers, upon whom are imposed ‘responsibilities and 
limitations on freedom of action which do not exist in regard to other callings.’” (
(2011) 194 Cal.App.4th 1454, 
1466.) “Thus, the term must be ‘considered in the context in which the Legislature 
considered it, as conduct which is hostile to the welfare of the general public . . . more 
specifically in this case, conduct which is hostile to the welfare of the school 
community.’” ( , , 53 Cal.App.5th at p. 337, quoting , , 1 
Cal.3d at p. 224.) 
Analysis 
Certain of the allegations of Teacher’s misconduct in his actions towards 
students, if true, are sufficient to sustain Teacher’s immediate suspension based on 
immoral conduct. Specifically, rubbing a student’s breast with his arm, telling a student 
she smelled nice, rubbing a student’s shoulders, calling a student a “little calientita,”
telling a student not to get a boyfriend, joking that a student was trying to blow him a 
kiss, telling a student she looked really good in her shirt, calling a student lazy, and 
joking about a student having lice are offensive, indecent, and depraved acts that 
show flagrant or shameless indifference to community standards and/or are hostile to 
the students in Teacher’s classroom. 
Teacher conceded rubbing a student’s breast is immoral conduct. His argument 
the District’s exhibits, incorporated into the Statement of Charges, do not support the 
allegation was not persuasive for purposes of this Motion.7 Teacher argued his alleged misconduct, other than rubbing a student’s breast, 
even if true, does not fall into three categories of behavior recognized by courts as 
constituting immoral conduct: (1) sexual harassment or public sexual activity by a 
teacher, (2) a teacher’s drug use or possession, and (3) theft of property or 
compensation by a teacher. Teacher’s argument was not persuasive. The Statement of 
Charges sets forth a pattern of behavior constituting sexual harassment, if true. 
Moreover, the definition of immoral conduct, as articulated by the court in 
and , is not limited to three categories of conduct. 
Teacher’s claim that the alleged conduct could be the result of mistake, 
inadvertence, ignorance, or misperception by students was likewise not persuasive.
Teacher’s inappropriate comments to students, as alleged, were not the product of 
mistake or inadvertence. Moreover, immoral conduct and bad judgment are not 
mutually exclusive, and immoral conduct as defined by does not require ill 
intent. 
All arguments made by counsel in their briefs and at oral argument have been 
considered. As shown above, facts pleaded in the Statement of Charges, if true, are 
sufficient to support a claim against Teacher for immoral conduct and therefore 
constitute a basis for immediate suspension without pay under Education Code section 
44939, subdivision (c)(1). Accordingly, the Motion for Immediate Reversal of 
Suspension is denied.
//
//
//8 ORDER
The motion by Ulises Sanchez-Jimenez for immediate reversal of his suspension 
without pay is denied.
DATE:
HARDEN SOOPER
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings
