BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Petition to Revoke Probation Against: 

MICHAEL ANTHONEY CAYTON, Respondent 

Case No. 1-371665807 

OAH No. 2019100007 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Dena Coggins, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings 

(OAH), State of California, heard this matter on January 29, 2020, Sacramento, 

California. 

(Commission). 

Seth A. Curtis, Deputy Attorney General, represented Mary Vixie Sandy, Ed.D. 

(complainant), Executive Director, California Commission on Teacher Credentialing 

Jonathan Turner, Attorney at Law, represented Michael Anthoney Cayton 

(respondent), who was present at the hearing. 

Oral and documentary evidence was received. The record was closed and the 

matter was submitted for decision on January 29, 2020. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1. 

On August 23, 1999, the Commission issued respondent a Preliminary 

Multiple Subject Teaching Credential (Preliminary Multiple Subject Teaching 

Credential). The Preliminary Multiple Subject Teaching Credential expired on April 1, 

2006. 

2. 

On January 17, 2006, the Commission issued respondent a Clear Multiple 

Subject Teaching Credential (Clear Multiple Subject Teaching Credential) with 

authorization to teach all subjects. The Clear Multiple Subject Teaching Credential will 

expire on February 1, 2021, and was in full force and effect at all relevant times. 

3. 

On July 8, 2003, the Commission issued respondent an Administrative 

Services Credential, Certificate of Eligibility (Administrative Credential). The 

Administrative Credential was in full force and effect at all relevant times. 

4. 

On November 1, 2005, the Commission issued respondent a Preliminary 

Administrative Services Credential (Preliminary Administrative Credential). The 

Preliminary Administrative Credential expired on December 1, 2010. 

5. 

On March 12, 2009, the Commission issued respondent an Emergency 

Crosscultural, Language and Academic Development Permit (Permit). The Permit 

expired on April 1, 2012. 

6. 

On October 20, 2010, the Commission issued respondent a Clear 

Administrative Services Credential (Clear Administrative Credential). The Clear 

Administrative Credential expired on April 1, 2016. 

2 

7.

On May 30, 2011, the Commission issued respondent a Clear 

Crosscultural, Language and Academic Development Certificate (Certificate). The 

Certificate was in full force and effect at all relevant times. 1  

8. 

On September 13, 2019, complainant, acting solely in her official 

capacity, signed and thereafter filed the Petition to Revoke Probation. Complainant 

robation and impose the stayed 

Credentials revocation because respondent failed to comply with the terms and 

conditions of probation. Specifically, complainant alleges respondent violated the 

terms of probation by failing to begin and/or continue to participate in ongoing 

therapy or counseling and falsely stating under penalty of perjury that he attended 

therapy or counseling on two occasions in 2019. 

9. 

Respondent timely filed a Notice of Defense pursuant to Government 

Code section 11506. The matter was set for an evidentiary hearing before an 

Administrative Law Judge of the Office of Administrative Hearings, an independent 

adjudicative agency of the State of California, pursuant to Government Code section 

11500 et seq. 

Prior Disciplinary Action 

10.  On September 4, 2018, complainant signed and filed an Accusation in 

Case Number 1-371665807 (Accusation), alleging respondent subjected his Credentials 

to disciplinary action based upon his addiction to the use of intoxicating beverages, 

                                              

1 

various teaching and administrative credentials are referred to 

 

3 

unprofessional conduct, and evident unfitness for service. Specifically, respondent was 

alleged to have been convicted of violating Vehicle Code section 23152, subdivision 

(b), driving with a blood alcohol level of .08 percent or more, a misdemeanor. The 

circumstances underlying the conviction were alleged to have occurred on March 5, 

2017, when respondent was stopped by law enforcement and performed poorly on 

field sobriety tests. Respondent was alleged to have been placed under arrest, and 

found to have a .22 percent blood alcohol content. Respondent was further alleged to 

have been sentenced to 15 days in jail, ordered to complete an 18-month driving 

under the influence class, placed 

 ordered to pay fines and 

fees. 

imposed: 

11. 

The Accusation further alleged the following prior disciplinary actions 

taken against respondent, in order to determine the degree of discipline to be 

On or about May 29, 2015, in a prior disciplinary action 

entitled In the Matter of the Accusation Against Michael 

Anthoney Cayton, before the [Commission], in Case 

Number 1-

convictions: 

for a period of twenty-one (21) days for the following 

4 

On or about January 11, 1998,2 in the San Joaquin 

County Municipal Court, Respondent was convicted 

on his plea of guilty to violating Penal Code section 

647 (g), disorderly conduct, a misdemeanor. 

  On or about December 13, 1998, in the Oklahoma 

County District Court, State of Oklahoma, 

Respondent was convicted on his plea of guilty to 

violating Title 21, Oklahoma Statutes section 1731, 

larceny, a felony. 

  On or about February 18, 1998, in the San Joaquin 

County Superior Court, Respondent was convicted on 

his plea of nolo contendere to violating Penal Code 

section 242, battery, a misdemeanor. 

  On or about September 22, 2000, in the San Joaquin 

County Superior Court, Respondent was convicted on 

his plea of nolo contendere to violating Vehicle Code 

section 23152 (b), driving with a blood alcohol level 

of .08 percent or more, with a prior conviction, a 

misdemeanor. 

                                              

2 Respondent testified at the hearing in this matter that the convictions listed in 

the Accusation as occurring on January 11, 1998 and December 13, 1998, were actually 

received in 1988. 

5 

On or about December 26, 2000, in the San Joaquin 

County Superior Court, Respondent was convicted on 

his plea of nolo contendere to violating Vehicle Code 

section 23152 (b), driving with a blood alcohol level 

of .08 percent or more, with a prior conviction, a 

misdemeanor.  

  On or about April 9, 2001, in the San Joaquin County 

Superior Court, Respondent was convicted on his 

plea of nolo contendere to violating Penal Code 

section 602.5, unauthorized entry of a dwelling or 

house, a misdemeanor.  

  On or about March 4, 2014, in the San Joaquin 

County Superior Court, Respondent was convicted on 

his plea of nolo contendere to violating Vehicle Code 

section 23103/23103.5, alcohol related reckless 

driving, a misdemeanor. 

[¶] . . . [¶] 

[O]n or about September 20, 2003, in a prior disciplinary 

suspended for a period of ten (10) days for the following: 

  On or about April 9, 2001, Respondent was 

convicted in San Joaquin Superior Court on his 

plea [of] nolo contendere to violating Penal Code 

section 602.5, entering a non commercial [sic] 

6 

dwelling on or about September 3, 2000. 

Respondent failed to disclose the offense on his 

March 1, 2001, application with the Commission. 

[O]n or about October 12, 2002, Respondent was publicly 

reproved by the [Commission] due to the following: 

  On or about September 22, 2000, Respondent 

was convicted in San Joaquin Superior Court on 

his plea [of] nolo contendere to violating Vehicle 

Code section 23152 (b), driving with a blood 

alcohol content of .08 percent or higher, a 

misdemeanor. 

  On or about December 26, 2000, Respondent was 

convicted on his plea of nolo contendere in San 

Joaquin Superior Court to violating Vehicle Code 

section 23152 (b), driving with a blood alcohol 

content of .08 percent or higher with a prior 

alcohol related driving conviction, a 

misdemeanor. 

  Respondent failed to disclose on his March 1, 

2001, application with the Commission, that he 

was convicted on December 13, 1988, in District 

Court County of Oklahoma to violating Section 

1731, Title 21 of the Oklahoma Status, Felonious 

Larceny. 

7 

Respondent failed to disclose on his March 1, 

2001, application with the Commission, that he 

was convicted by his plea of guilty on January 11, 

1988, in the Stockton Judicial District Court, 

County of San Joaquin, to a violation of Penal 

Code section 647 (g), prowling, a misdemeanor. 

  Respondent failed to disclose on his March 1, 

2001, application with the Commission, that he 

was convicted by his plea of no contest in 

Stockton Municipal Court, County of San Joaquin, 

to violating Penal Code section 242, battery, a 

misdemeanor. 

12.  On January 8, 2019, pursuant to a Proposed Consent Determination and 

Order entered into by respondent and the Commission, respondent understood and 

admitted the truth of each and every allegation in the Accusation. The Commission 

adopted the Proposed Consent Determination and Order as its Decision and Order in 

the matter, and the Decision and Order became effective April 19, 2019. 

13. 

respondent Credentials were revoked, the revocation was stayed, and respondent was 

placed on probation for seven years, subject to certain terms and conditions. His 

Credentials were suspended for 90 days, commencing on the effective date of the 

Decision and Order. The relevant terms and conditions are as follows: 

[¶] . . . [¶] 

8 

[Condition] 3.  Submit Written Reports. Respondent shall 

report to the Commission quarterly, on a schedule 

designated by the Commission or the monitor. Reports shall 

be made either in person or in writing, as directed. Among 

other requirements as determined by the Commission, 

Respondent shall state in each report under penalty of 

perjury whether he has complied with all the terms and 

conditions of probation. Failure to submit timely reports as 

directed shall be considered a probation violation. 

[¶] . . . [¶] 

[Condition] 8.  Therapy or Counseling Program. 

Respondent, at his own expense, shall begin, or continue to 

participate in, on-going therapy or counseling with his 

current counselor, W.S., or another licensed therapist or 

counselor approved by the Commission at least once a 

month until such time as the Commission releases him from 

this requirement and only upon the recommendation of the 

therapist or counselor. Respondent shall submit quarterly 

reports to the Commission indicating that he is continuing 

with the aforementioned therapy. 

[¶] . . . [¶] 

[Condition] 14.  Compliance with All Terms of Probation. 

Respondent shall fully comply with all the terms and 

conditions of this Order and cooperate with the 

9 

Commission and his assigned probation compliance 

monitor (monitor) in the monitoring and investigation of 

 compliance with probation terms. . . . 

[Condition] 15.  Violation of Probation. If Respondent 

violates any term or condition of this Order, the 

Commission may refer the matter 

Office to file a Petition to Revoke Probation, and after 

giving Respondent notice and opportunity to be heard, may 

set aside the stay order and impose the stayed discipline. If 

during the period of probation, a Petition to Revoke 

or the Attorney Gene

Credentials, the probationary period shall automatically be 

extended and shall not expire until final action is taken on 

the Petition by the Commission.  

QUARTERLY COMPLIANCE REPORTS 

14. 

Berenice Osguera, a probation monitor at the Commission, testified at 

the hearing. 

Osguera sent respondent a letter reiterating that pursuant to the Decision and Order, 

respondent was subject to probationary terms and conditions for seven years. Ms. 

Osguera noted that the probation period was from April 19, 2019, through April 18, 

2026. In the letter, Ms. Oseguera summarized some of the probation conditions, 

including that respondent 

10 

Commission releases [respondent] 

respondent to contact her to set up a probation orientation. 

time as the 

15.  On May 14, 2019, Ms. Osegue

orientation by telephone. During the probation orientation, Ms. Osguera reviewed the 

probation terms and conditions with respondent, and respondent indicated he 

understood them. 

16.  On July 29, 2019, respondent signed and subsequently submitted to the 

Commission his Quarterly Compliance Report for the reporting period of April 19, 

2019, to July 19, 2019 (Quarterly Compliance Report). The report asked respondent the 

following, in pertinent part: 

 

For explanations, attach a separate sheet. . . . 

9. During this quarter, did you attend mental health 

counseling? If no, please explain. If yes, please list the dates 

that you attended counseling during the previous three 

months. 

17. 

In response to Question 9, respondent did not mark either checkbox next 

or retired I in [sic] the 

progress [sic] of getting another one threw [sic

 

18. 

Respondent signed the quarterly report under the following statement: 

11 

I hereby submit this Probation Questionnaire as required by 

the California Commission on Teacher Credentialing in the 

Consent Determination and Order. I declare under penalty 

of perjury under the laws of the State of California that the 

foregoing is true and correct and understand that false 

statements or omissions of fact may be cause for revocation 

of probation. 

19. 

Quarterly Compliance Report on 

July 30, 2019. On August 1, 2019, Ms. Oseguera contacted respondent by email to 

contact information. Ms. Oseguera planned to verify with 

respondent attended the counseling sessions listed in his 

Quarterly Compliance Report. Respondent responded to the email on the same day. 

request 

respond

He 

 

[t]hose dates were 

 [

] 

meet with Mr. Smith[,] as my insurance was canceled after 

[I] was placed on administrative leave from the district 

sense [

] I was re instated [

] back into the district on 

July 18[,] my insurance became available today 8/1 and 

listed [above] is the psychologist

 

disappointed in myself about those incorrect dates. Please 

advise. 

20.  On August 1, 2019, respondent signed and submitted an amended 

Quarterly Compliance Report (Amended Quarterly Compliance Report). Respondent 

submitted the Amended Quarterly Compliance Report after Ms. Oseguera contacted 

12 

Question 9, indicating that he did not attend mental health counseling during the 

reporting period. Along with the Amended Quarterly Compliance Report, respondent 

submitted a letter, dated August 1, 2019. In the letter, respondent explained: 

ponse to 

This is my updated response to Question 9 on my Quarterly 

Compliance Report, 

21.  Ms. Oseguera received another letter from respondent on August 5, 

2019. In that letter, respondent wrote: 

completely unaware that once an employee is placed on 

Administrative leave that the employe[r] suspends their 

insurance. So during the months of my suspension[,] I did 

not have insurance. Once my suspension ended[,] I had to 

start the process over of applying for insurance[,] which my 

insurance became valid on 8/1/2019

afford to pay for a doctor because I was [

] my credentials 

was [

] suspended. 

[I] want you to be aware that I made a mistake on my 

previous Quarterly Compliance Report that I sent to you 

referring to Question 9. As stated on the new updated 

attachment[,] I did not receive any counseling for this 

quarter and I have made arrangements for [

] to receive 

counseling as stated in the email providing you ok the 

13 

psychologist I have set up for September 3, 2019. Please 

accept this as true and complete as there was an error on 

question 9 and I wants [

] to be completely honest.  . . . 

Respondent subsequently emailed Ms. Oseguera in August 2019 to inform her 

 

 

22. 

Respondent is 52 years old. 

egree in educational 

administration and supervision. He began working for the Stockton Unified School 

District (District) in 1998, as a middle school teacher. Since that time, he has held 

several positions in the District, including administrator, assistant principal, and 

principal. In his most recent performance evaluations from the District, from 2013 

areas of evaluation.  

23. 

According to respondent, he wrote the false mental health counseling 

employed as a medical assistant for 24 years. He testified that listing the false dates 

although, he later admitted that his wife has been 

testified he is remorseful and  deeply regrets  his actions. While respondent was 

suspended for 90 days, he lost his health insurance, so he would have been required to 

pay for counseling sessions out-of-pocket until August 2019, when his health 

14 

insurance was reinstated. According to respondent, he has been in compliance with all 

other terms and conditions of probation. 

24. 

Respondent identified himself as 

means he drinks at 

attends Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) two times per week, since May 2019. He 

previously attended AA in 2017, per court order. In addition, respondent attends Dual 

Recovery Anonymous (DRA) once per week. He began attending DRA meetings in 

August 2019. 

25. 

Respondent has been receiving weekly individual mental health 

counseling from Sybil Stafford, a licensed marriage and family therapist, since August 

2019. In addition, Ms. Stafford began providing respondent and his family with family 

therapy beginning in December 2018. During his counseling sessions, respondent 

works on his issues with decision making and anxiety, and his triggers for drinking 

alcohol.  Respondent submitted a letter from his AA sponsor, dated November 20, 

2019. In the letter, 

 

from a 

fellow attendee at DRA meetings. The fellow attendee confirmed 

attendance at DRA meetings. Respondent agreed to participate in a clinical trial 

through the American Psychological Association in order to help him to understand 

his triggers relating to alcohol and decision making. 

26. 

Respondent is passionate about his work with students of the District 

and his community. He is involved in community outreach to prepare students for 

applying to Historically Black Colleges and Universities. He submitted numerous 

certificates of appreciation and recognition, dated between 2004 to 2008, 

commending him on his work in the community and with students. 

15 

27.

Respondent submitted numerous support letters from colleagues, 

friends, family and clergy. The letter writers described respondent as 

 

Discussion 

28. 

s Credentials were placed on probation 

for seven years subject to certain terms and conditions. One of those probationary 

conditions required respondent to report quarterly to the Commission, under penalty 

of perjury, whether he was complying with all the terms and conditions of probation. 

Another probation condition required respondent to participate in ongoing therapy or 

counseling at least once a month until he was released from the requirement by the 

Commission. Respondent was aware and understood both probation conditions by at 

least the time of his probation orientation on May 14, 2019. However, on his first 

Quarterly Compliance Report, submitted on July 30, 2019, for the period of April 19, 

2019 to July 19, 2019, respondent intentionally and falsely represented that he 

attended mental health counseling on May 15, 2019, and June 19, 2019. 

conduct violated the terms of his probation.  

29. 

Respondent provided support letters, certificates, accolades, and other 

evidence showing he is passionate about his career as a teacher and administrator at 

the District. He has had a long successful history in his role as an educator and 

community leader. As a credentialed teacher and educator, it is imperative that 

respondent act in a manner that is consistent with his position as a role model in the 

community and in the District. Respondent must be honest and possess good 

judgment. R

only three months 

after his Credentials were placed on probation is concerning and troubling. His 

misconduct shows he is not truthful and has impaired judgment. As an explanation for 

16 

his misconduct, respondent testified that he was on administrative leave, was not 

receiving pay, and did not have health insurance, so he would have been required to 

pay out-of-

,  so 

he falsely represented that he attended counseling sessions. However, at no time did 

respondent communicate his circumstances to his probation monitor. Instead, he 

provided false statements under penalty of perjury to the Commission, and did not 

information. Although respondent has made commendable efforts to maintain his 

sobriety and to comply with the terms of his probation, respondent has not addressed 

his underlying issues of being untruthful, as evidenced by his misconduct and his 

testimony regarding being a sole provider for his family. 

30. 

The Commission cannot be assured that respondent will comply with the 

terms of his probation in the future. Based on all of the evidence, complainant has met 

her burden of establishing cause to revoke the probation that was granted by the 

Commission, and to impose the disciplinary order that was stayed, thereby revoking all 

credentials, certificates and authorizations issued to respondent.  

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Complainant has the burden of proving each of the causes to revoke 

probation alleged in the Petition to Revoke Probation, and must do so by a 

preponderance of the evidence. (

 

required to prove the allegations in an accusation by clear and convincing evidence, it 

is only required to prove the allegations in a petition to revoke probation by a 

17 

 

(2010) 184 Cal.App.4th 1434, 1441.) Evidence that is deemed to preponderate must 

 (1984) 152 Cal.App.3d 

and of solid value. (

 (1952) 112 Cal.App.2d 638, 644.). 

2. 

As set forth in Factual Findings 16 through 21, 23, and 28, the evidence 

established respondent violated Condition 8 by failing to begin and/or continue in 

ongoing therapy or counseling. Therefore, cause exists to set aside the stay order and 

impose the stayed discipline of revo

Condition 15 of the April 19, 2019 Decision and Order. 

3. 

As set forth in the Factual Findings 16 through 21, 23, and 28, the 

evidence established respondent violated Condition 3 by falsely stating under penalty 

of perjury that he attended therapy or counseling sessions on May 15 and June 19, 

2019, when he knew he had not. Therefore, cause exists to set aside the stay order and 

to 

Condition 15 of the April 19, 2019 Decision and Order. 

 

 

 

/ / / 

/ / / 

18 

ORDER

The Petition to Revoke Probation against Michael Anthoney Cayton is 

GRANTED. The Preliminary Multiple Subject Teaching Credential, Clear Multiple 

Subject Teaching Credential, Administrative Credential, Preliminary Administrative 

Credential, Clear Administrative Credential, Permit, and Certificate issued to 

respondent are REVOKED. 

DATE: February 25, 2020

 

DENA COGGINS 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearing

19 

