BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Accusation Against: 

MICHAEL CHRISTOPHER AGUILAR, Respondent 

Case No. 1-272957422 

OAH No. 2019090083 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Sean Gavin, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, State 

of California, heard this matter on December 18, 2019, in Fresno, California.

Karen R. Denvir, Deputy Attorney General, represented complainant Mary Vixie 

Sandy, Ed.D., Executive Director of the California Commission on Teacher Credentialing 

(Commission).

Attorney Joshua F. Richtel represented respondent Michael Christopher Aguilar 

(respondent), who was present throughout the hearing.

Oral and documentary evidence was received, the record was closed, and the 

matter was submitted for decision on December 18, 2019.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

Procedural Background 

1.

On February 1, 1998, the Commission issued a Clear Single Subject with 

English Learners and English Authorizations Teaching Credential to respondent. 1 The 

Credential expires October 1, 2023, unless renewed or revoked. At hearing, there was 

no evidence presented of prior discipline of the credential.2 

2. 

On December 21, 2018, the Commission’s Committee of Credentials 

determined that probable cause existed to recommend that the Commission bring an 

adverse action against respondent’s credential. Respondent timely requested an 

administrative hearing challenging that recommendation. 

3. 

On June 7, 2019, complainant, acting solely in her official capacity, signed 

an Accusation seeking to discipline respondent’s credentials based on his

unprofessional conduct, immoral conduct, evident unfitness for service, commission of 

an act involving moral turpitude, and addiction to the use of intoxicating beverages to 

excess. 

issuance. 

      

1 The Accusation incorrectly identified September 6, 2003 as the date of 

2 The Accusation alleges that on June 3, 2012, the Commission suspended 

respondent’s credential for 21 days based on the convictions identified in Factual 

Findings 7 through 9. At hearing, complainant submitted evidence of those 

convictions, but no evidence of prior discipline based on them. 

2

Causes for Discipline: Criminal Convictions (2016 – 2017)

4.

On May 27, 20163, in the Superior Court of California, County of Fresno, 

case number F16902831, respondent was convicted, on his plea of no contest, of 

violating Penal Code section 273.5, subdivision (a) (corporal injury on a spouse or 

cohabitant), a felony (domestic violence). He was sentenced to 76 days in jail, with 

credit for time served, and ordered to pay fines and fees. He was also placed on formal

probation for three years. 

The circumstances underlying the conviction occurred on April 30, 2016, while 

respondent was driving with his live-in girlfriend. They argued, and respondent 

slapped, grabbed, and attempted to strangle her.  

5. 

On November 7, 2016, in the Superior Court of California, County of 

Kings, case number 15CM-4537, respondent was convicted, on his plea of no contest, 

of violating Vehicle Code section 14601.2, subdivision (a) (driving on a license 

suspended due to a prior conviction for driving under the influence of alcohol), a 

misdemeanor. He was sentenced to 10 days in jail and ordered to pay fines and fees. 

The circumstances underlying the conviction occurred on May 16, 2015, when 

respondent drove his vehicle despite having a suspended driver’s license. He was 

stopped by an officer with the Hanford Police Department, who discovered 

respondent’s license was suspended, issued him a misdemeanor citation, and referred 

the matter to the Kings County District Attorney for prosecution. 

3 The Accusation incorrectly identified September 2, 2016 as the date of 

      

conviction; September 2, 2016, was the date of sentencing. 

3

6.

On September 22, 2017, in the Superior Court of California, County of 

Fresno, case number M16921354, respondent was convicted, on his plea of no contest, 

of violating Vehicle Code section 23152, subdivision (b) (driving with a blood alcohol 

content [BAC] of 0.08 percent or greater), a misdemeanor (DUI). He also admitted a 

sentencing enhancement under Vehicle Code section 23546 (two prior DUI convictions 

within the previous 10 years). He was sentenced to 364 days in jail. Imposition of 

sentence was suspended for five years, and respondent was placed on informal 

probation on conditions that: (1) 204 days of jail time would be suspended while he 

was enrolled in a Secure Continuous Remote Alcohol Monitoring (SCRAM) program; 

(2) he install an Ignition Interlock device on his vehicle for two years; and (3) he pay 

fines and fees. 

The circumstances underlying the conviction occurred on April 30, 2016, when 

respondent drove after drinking alcohol and crashed his vehicle into a grape vineyard. 

He stipulated that his BAC was 0.08 percent.

Matters in Aggravation: Criminal Convictions (2009 – 2010) 

7. 

On July 8, 2009, in the Superior Court of California, County of Madera, 

case number CCR025820, respondent was convicted, on his plea of no contest, of 

violating Vehicle Code section 23152, subdivision (b) (driving with a BAC of 0.08 

percent or greater), a misdemeanor (DUI). He also admitted a sentencing enhancement 

under Vehicle Code section 23578 (BAC of 0.15 percent or greater). He was sentenced 

to three days in jail, with credit for time served. Imposition of sentence was suspended 

for three years, and respondent was placed on informal probation on conditions that 

he enroll in a three-month DUI course and pay fines and fees. 

4

The circumstances underlying the conviction occurred on January 31, 2009, 

when respondent drove after drinking alcohol. He stipulated that his BAC was 0.15 

percent. 

percent. 

8. 

On July 13, 2009, in the Superior Court of California, County of Merced, 

case number MM227173, respondent was convicted, on his plea of no contest, of 

violating Vehicle Code section 23152, subdivision (b) (driving with a BAC of 0.08 

percent or greater), a misdemeanor (DUI). He was sentenced to two days in jail, 

ordered to enroll in a DUI course, and ordered to pay fines and fees. 

The circumstances underlying the conviction occurred on August 29, 2008, 

when respondent drove after drinking alcohol. He stipulated that his BAC was 0.14 

9. 

On October 5, 2010, in the Superior Court of California, County of 

Madera, case number SCR010604, respondent was convicted, on his plea of no 

contest, of violating Penal Code sections 136.1, subdivision (b)(1) (attempting to 

prevent or dissuade a victim of a crime from reporting the victimization) and 243, 

subdivision (e)(1) (battery on a person in a dating relationship), both misdemeanors. 

Imposition of sentence was suspended for two years, and respondent was placed on 

informal probation on conditions that he enroll in a 52-week batterer’s program, 

complete 100 hours of community service, and pay fines and fees.

The circumstances underlying the conviction occurred on April 2, 2010, while 

respondent was driving with his girlfriend. They argued, and respondent punched her 

in the face. 

5

Respondent’s Evidence

10.

Respondent testified at hearing. He admits he is an alcoholic, but says he 

did not realize it until mid-2016 when he began attending a rehabilitation center in 

Laguna, Florida (rehab). He started drinking alcohol in ninth grade, and “self-

medicated to take away the pain” of a difficult upbringing. He continued to drink 

alcohol throughout his adolescence and adult life. While in rehab, he attended 

Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) meetings, had an AA sponsor, and worked AA’s 12-step 

recovery program. He stopped attending AA meetings in 2018. He has not used 

alcohol since May 5, 2016, but no longer has a sponsor, and no longer actively works 

AA’s 12-step program. Instead, his relapse prevention plan includes playing golf and 

talking to friends and family.

11. 

Regarding his 2016 domestic violence conviction, respondent explained 

that he and his girlfriend had spent the night drinking alcohol and gambling at a local 

casino. He had lent her $400, and she lost it gambling. On the drive home, they 

argued. While the vehicle was in motion, she attempted to open the door to exit. 

Respondent grabbed her arm to prevent her from falling out. He does not recall 

slapping or strangling her.  

12. 

Respondent eventually stopped the vehicle, and his girlfriend exited. She 

yelled for help, and a passerby gave her a ride to a nearby hospital. When police 

officers arrived at the hospital, they observed a red abrasion on her collar bone, a 

bruise on her right arm, and redness on her left arm. She reported to the police that 

respondent had caused her injuries by slapping her and trying to strangle her with his 

right hand while he drove. 

6

13.

After respondent’s girlfriend exited the vehicle, respondent drove away. 

Shortly thereafter, respondent crashed his vehicle into a grape vineyard while trying to 

turn onto a dirt road. His vehicle became lodged on top of grape vines and was 

disabled. California Highway Patrol received a call about the collision and dispatched 

officers to the scene. When they arrived, the officers questioned respondent. He told 

them he was not driving, but rather had gone to that location with a friend to drink 

beer. He exhibited objective signs of alcohol intoxication, and officers administered 

field sobriety tests. Respondent performed unsatisfactorily, and was arrested.

14. 

Respondent has been an English Language Development teacher at 

Duane E. Furman High School in the Madera Unified School District for the past 15 

years. Following his 2016 domestic violence conviction, his name and mugshot were 

featured on a local news story about Fresno’s Most Wanted. In addition, respondent’s 

SCRAM program required him to wear an ankle monitor at all times. Respondent has 

knowledge that his students and coworkers were aware of both his local media 

coverage and his ankle monitor, and discussed them at the school. 

 Factors 

15. 

In 

(1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, the California 

Supreme Court concluded that a teaching credential cannot be disciplined for immoral 

conduct, unprofessional conduct, or conduct involving moral turpitude “unless that 

conduct indicates that the [educator] is unfit to teach.” (

. at p. 229.) The Court 

outlined factors for consideration when determining whether an educator’s conduct 

demonstrates unfitness to teach (

.), and the Commission adopted those factors by 

enacting California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80302.

7

LIKELIHOOD OF ADVERSE EFFECT ON STUDENTS OR FELLOW TEACHERS

16.

“A teacher [. . .] in the public school system is regarded by the public and 

pupils in the light of an exemplar, whose words and actions are likely to be followed 

by the children coming under [his] care and protection.” (

 

(1953) 41 Cal.2d 546, 552.) Respondent’s repeated disregard for the law reflects poorly 

on him individually, and on teachers generally. Moreover, the nature of respondent’s 

criminal activity demonstrates a severe lack of sound judgment. Because students are 

impressionable and may try to emulate their teachers, it is essential that an educator’s 

behavior be beyond reproach. Respondent’s multiple convictions and the underlying 

conduct demonstrated behavior inimical to the well-being of students, and portrayed 

both him and the teaching profession negatively. Furthermore, respondent wearing an 

ankle monitor at school “may have adversely affected others,” and “especially would 

have adversely impacted [respondent’s] ability to earn the respect of [his] students.”

(2010) 184 Cal.App.4th 462, 

(

477.)

TYPE OF CREDENTIALS HELD

17. 

Respondent’s Single Subject with English Learners and English 

Authorizations Teaching Credential authorizes him to teach students learning English 

as a second language. As a result, he may be the teacher with whom his students have 

the most in common, and his students may have a deeper connection with him than 

their other teachers. Therefore, it is even more imperative that he exemplify the type of 

behavior society wants emulated by students and possess sound judgment. 

Respondent’s convictions and the underlying conduct raise concerns over whether he 

is an appropriate role model for his students. 

8

EXTENUATING OR AGGRAVATING CIRCUMSTANCES

18.

Neither the Education Code nor the regulations adopted by the 

Commission specify what constitutes “extenuating circumstances.” However, the 

California Code of Regulations defines “mitigating factor” as “an event or circumstance 

which demonstrates that the public, schoolchildren and the profession would be 

adequately protected by a more lenient degree of adverse action or no adverse action 

whatsoever.” (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80300, subd. (m).) The Commission’s regulations 

also define “aggravating factor” as “an event or circumstance which demonstrates that 

a greater degree of adverse action for an act of professional misconduct is needed to 

adequately protect the public, schoolchildren or the profession.” (

. at § 80300, subd. 

(b).) 

19. 

The repeated nature of respondent’s convictions and underlying conduct 

demonstrates a pattern of misconduct involving both domestic violence and the 

consumption of alcohol. Furthermore, respondent’s convictions for driving on a 

suspended license and attempting to prevent or dissuade a victim of a crime both 

demonstrate a flagrant disrespect for the law. Taken together, respondent’s 

convictions and the underlying conduct demonstrate the need for a greater degree of 

adverse action to ensure public protection. Respondent did not offer any evidence of 

mitigating circumstances.

THE MISCONDUCT

PRAISEWORTHINESS OR BLAMEWORTHINESS OF THE MOTIVES RESULTING IN 

20. 

Respondent bears the sole blame for his convictions and underlying 

conduct. An argument about $400 led to his 2016 domestic violence conviction. His 

9

lack of respect for the law led to his convictions for driving on a suspended license and 

DUI.  

LIKELIHOOD OF RECURRENCE 

21. 

Respondent has already been convicted of domestic violence twice and 

DUI three times. His second domestic violence conviction occurred after he had 

already taken a 52-week batterer’s program. In addition, he no longer attends AA, has 

a sponsor, or actively works a 12-step recovery program. The evidence suggests his 

criminal behavior is likely to reoccur. 

PUBLICITY OR NOTORIETY OF MISCONDUCT 

22. 

Following his 2016 domestic violence conviction, respondent’s criminal 

conduct was featured on local media. In addition, he wore an ankle monitor at school, 

and his students and coworkers had knowledge of both of these circumstances.

Discussion 

23. 

It was undisputed respondent had three convictions between May 2016 

and September 2017. The persuasive evidence established the criminal conduct 

underlying those convictions involved domestic violence, driving while under the 

influence of alcohol, and driving on a suspended license. The clear and convincing 

evidence established that respondent demonstrated evident unfitness for service, 

engaged in unprofessional and immoral conduct, and committed acts involving moral 

turpitude. In addition, respondent acknowledged being an alcoholic. When 

considering the relevant 

 factors, respondent’s conduct demonstrated his 

unfitness to teach for the reasons explained in Factual Findings 15 through 22. 

10

Therefore, cause exists to discipline his credential. In light of the serious and repeated 

nature of his criminal conduct, respondent’s credential should be revoked. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Complainant bears the burden of proving the existence of grounds for 

disciplining respondent’s credentials and certificate, and must do so by clear and 

convincing evidence to a reasonable certainty. (

(1983) 33 Cal.3d 532, 536 [“When an administrative agency initiates an action 

to suspend or revoke a license, the burden of proving the facts necessary to support 

the action rests with the agency making the allegation”]; 

 (1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1036, 1039-1040 [recognizing that the 

clear and convincing evidence standard applies to proceedings to discipline a teacher’s 

credential, whereas the lesser preponderance of the evidence standard applies to 

proceedings to dismiss a teacher from particular employment].) “The courts have 

defined clear and convincing evidence as evidence which is so clear as to leave no 

substantial doubt and as sufficiently strong to command the unhesitating assent of 

every reasonable mind. [Citations.] It has been said that a preponderance calls for 

probability, while clear and convincing proof demands a 

[citations].” 

(

(1978) 83 Cal.App.3d 890, 899; italics original.) 

2. 

The California Supreme Court has recognized that the terms “immoral 

conduct” and “unprofessional conduct” substantially overlap one another and that 

conduct which constitutes one, often includes the other. (See, 

, 

, 1 Cal.3d 214, 221, fn. 9.) “Unprofessional conduct” includes “‘that 

which violates the rules of ethical code of a profession or such conduct which is 

unbecoming a member of a profession in good standing.’” (

11

, 41 Cal.2d at p. 553; quoting, 66 Corpus Juris, p. 55.) In describing what 

constitutes “immoral conduct” within the context of the Education Code, the court in 

 (1960) 179 

Cal.App.2d 808, said:  

In 

, 36 Cal.2d 734, at page 

740 [227 P.2d 449], the Supreme Court quotes with 

approval the following statement from Words and Phrases, 

permanent edition, volume 20, pages 159-160: “The term 

‘immoral’ has been defined generally as that which is hostile 

to the welfare of the general public and contrary to good 

morals. Immorality has not been confined to sexual matters, 

but includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or 

indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; 

or as willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral 

indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the 

community, and as an inconsiderate attitude toward good 

order and the public welfare.” 

(

., at p. 811.)

3. 

The court in 

 (2011) 194 Cal.App.4th 1454, said the following about the 

definition of immoral or unprofessional conduct: 

Moreover, the definition of immoral or unprofessional 

conduct must be considered in conjunction with the unique 

position of public school teachers, upon whom are imposed 

12

“responsibilities and limitations on freedom of action which 

do not exist in regard to other callings.” [Citation.] 

(

., at p. 1466.) 

against a credential: 

4. 

And the following has been said about the analysis for determining 

whether particular conduct constitutes sufficient cause for taking adverse action 

, 66 Cal.App. 157, 168 [225 

P. 783], quoted in 

, 41 Cal.2d 

546, 553-554 [261 P.2d 261], found that the standards for 

judging the propriety of a teacher’s conduct, and the extent 

to which that conduct may be the basis for the revocation

of a credential, involves many aspects. “ . . . the teacher is 

entrusted with the custody of children and their high 

preparation for useful life. His habits, his speech, his good 

name, his cleanliness, the wisdom and propriety of his 

unofficial utterances, his associations, all are involved. His 

ability to inspire children and to govern them, his power as 

a teacher, and the character for which he stands are matters 

of major concern in a teacher’s selection and retention.”

(

(1972) 22 Cal.App.3d 988, 991.)

5. 

The Commission may discipline a credential for unprofessional conduct. 

(Ed. Code, § 44421.) The clear and convincing evidence established respondent 

engaged in unprofessional conduct. Therefore, cause exists to discipline his credential 

pursuant to Education Code section 44421. 

13

6.

The Commission may discipline a credential for immoral conduct. (Ed. 

Code, § 44421.) The clear and convincing evidence established respondent engaged in 

immoral conduct. Therefore, cause exists to discipline his credential pursuant to 

Education Code section 44421. 

7. 

The Commission may discipline a credential “for any cause that would 

have warranted the denial of an application for a credential or the renewal thereof.” 

(Ed. Code, § 44421.) An application for a credential may be denied if the applicant “has 

committed any act involving moral turpitude.” (Ed. Code, § 44345, subd. (e).) The clear 

and convincing evidence established respondent committed acts involving moral 

turpitude. Therefore, cause exists to discipline his credential pursuant to Education 

Code section 44421, as that statute relates to Education Code section 44345, 

subdivision (e). 

8. 

The Commission may discipline a credential for evident unfitness for 

service. (Ed. Code, § 44421.) The clear and convincing evidence established 

respondent’s evident unfitness for service. Therefore, cause exists to discipline his 

credential pursuant to Education Code section 44421. 

9. 

An application for a credential may be denied if the applicant “is 

addicted to the use of intoxicating beverages to excess.” (Ed. Code, § 44345, subd. (c).) 

The clear and convincing evidence established respondent “is addicted to the use of 

intoxicating beverages to excess.” Therefore, cause exists to discipline his credential 

pursuant to Education Code section 44421, as that statute relates to Education Code 

section 44345, subdivision (c). 

10. 

Cause exists to discipline respondent’s Clear Single Subject with English 

Learners and English Authorizations Teaching Credential for the reasons explained in 

14

Legal Conclusions 5 through 9, individually and collectively. When all admissible 

evidence is considered, respondent did not produce sufficient evidence of his 

continued fitness to perform the duties authorized under his credential, even on a 

probationary basis. Therefore, his credentials should be revoked. 

ORDER

The Clear Single Subject with English Learners and English Authorizations 

Teaching Credential issued to respondent Michael Christopher Aguilar on February 1, 

1998, is REVOKED.

DATE: January 15, 2020

 

SEAN GAVIN 

Administrative Law Judge

Office of Administrative Hearings

15

