BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Accusation and Statement of Issues 

Against: 

REBA CHONELL JOYNER, Respondent 

Case No. 1-636776785 

OAH No. 2019050950 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Administrative Law Judge Coren D. Wong, Office of Administrative Hearings, 

State of California, heard this matter on November 19 and 20, 2019, in Fresno, 

California.

(Commission).

Karen R. Denvir, Deputy Attorney General, represented complainant Mary Vixie 

Sandy, Ed.D., Executive Director of the California Commission on Teacher Credentialing 

Respondent Reba Chonell Joyner represented herself. 

Evidence was received, the record was closed, and the matter was submitted for 

written decision on November 20, 2019.

On December 16, 2019, the record was reopened to include Complainant’s Trial 

Brief as Exhibit 16, to allow respondent to object to Exhibit 16, and to allow 

complainant to respond to respondent’s objections. Neither party responded to 

Exhibit 16, and Exhibit 16 is admitted for purposes of argument only. The record was 

closed and the matter was resubmitted for written decision on December 30, 2019. 

SUMMARY 

Complainant alleges cause to discipline respondent’s teaching and 

administrative credentials and certificate of eligibility, and to deny her application for 

an Emergency Crosscultural, Language and Academic Development Certificate

(Certificate) because she: 1) hired someone with whom she was involved in a romantic 

relationship to be the athletic director for Toby Lawless Elementary School; 2) 

subsequently hired the same person as the night custodian for Thomas Elementary 

School while still in a romantic relationship with him; and 3) acted unprofessionally 

and discourteously toward her staff, teachers, parents, and students. Cause exists to 

discipline her credentials and certificate of eligibility, and to deny her application. 

When all the evidence is considered, respondent did not demonstrate she has the 

appropriate temperament and judgment to justify allowing her to retain her teaching 

credential, administrative credential, or certificate of eligibility, or granting her 

application for a Certificate. Therefore, her teaching credential, administrative 

credential, and certificate of eligibility should be revoked, and her application for a

Certificate should be denied.

2

FACTUAL FINDINGS

Jurisdictional Matters 

1.

The Commission issued respondent a Clear Multiple Subject Teaching 

Credential with an authorization in General Subjects on December 17, 1994. 

Respondent was issued an Administrative Services Credential — Certificate of Eligibility 

on May 19, 2005, and she was issued a Clear Administrative Services Credential on 

August 1, 2007. 

2. 

Respondent’s teaching credential and administrative services credential 

expire January 1, 2020, unless renewed or revoked. There is no expiration date for the 

certificate of eligibility. There is no history of prior discipline of her teaching credential 

or administrative services credential. 

3. 

Respondent signed an application for a Certificate on April 9, 2018. The 

Commission received the application the following week.

4. 

On July 27, 2018, the Committee of Credentials sent correspondence 

notifying respondent that it found probable cause to recommend: 1) revoking her 

administrative services credential and certificate of eligibility; 2) suspending her 

teaching credential; and 3) granting her application. Respondent requested 

reconsideration of the Committee of Credentials’s decision. Her request was denied for 

failure to provide new and relevant information. She requested an administrative 

hearing to challenge the Committee of Credentials’s recommendation. 

5. 

On March 8, 2019, complainant signed the Accusation and Statement of 

Issues solely in her official capacity. The Accusation seeks to revoke respondent’s 

administrative credential, certificate of eligibility, and teaching credential based on 

3

unprofessional conduct, acts of moral turpitude, immoral conduct, and evident 

unfitness for service. The Statement of Issues seeks to deny respondent’s application 

for a Certificate based on acts of moral turpitude.

Respondent’s Relevant Educational and Professional Background 

6.

Respondent earned her bachelor of arts degree and teaching credential 

from California State University, Fresno, and her administrative services credential and 

master’s degree from Fresno Pacific University. She began working for the Fresno 

Unified School District as a teacher on August 7, 1996. She was later appointed vice 

principal of Martin Luther King Elementary School and subsequently Toby Lawless 

Elementary School (Lawless). In 2013, she was appointed principal of Thomas 

Elementary School (Thomas).

7. 

On June 2, 2017, respondent voluntarily resigned her employment with 

the Fresno Unified School District, effective June 30, 2017. The school board 

subsequently accepted her resignation.

8. 

Respondent returned to the classroom as a combination 

kindergarten/first grade teacher at West Park Elementary School in the West Park 

School District in October 2018. She subsequently became the principal at W.E.B. 

DuBois Public Charter School, a charter school affiliated with the Washington Unified 

School District. She continues to hold that position as of the date of hearing.

Fresno Unified School District’s Receipt of Complaints 

9. 

Misty Her is an instructional assistant superintendent with the Fresno 

Unified School District (District). She is responsible for supervising 30 schools in four 

4

different regions of the District, including Thomas. She previously worked for the 

District as a teacher, vice principal, and principal. 

10.  Ms. Her’s process for resolving complaints her office receives is to resolve 

them “at the lowest level possible.” Her assistant, Annette Montague, receives all 

complaints and makes an initial determination as to whether Ms. Montague can 

resolve the complaint herself. If she determines she cannot resolve a complaint alone, 

a principal and vice principal “on special assignment” with Ms. Her’s office can assist 

with resolving the complaint. Any complaints not resolved at a lower level or deemed 

“serious” are brought to Ms. Her’s attention. 

11. 

Beginning in the 2014/2015 school year, Ms. Her’s office received 

complaints from parents of students at Thomas. The complaints alleged respondent 

was unprofessional when communicating with parents, did not maintain proper 

oversight over school funds, failed to maintain adequate records, and was unable to 

build and maintain a positive culture and climate at Thomas such that students and 

staff were transferring out of the school. 

12.  Ms. Montague initially attempted to resolve the complaints herself, but 

eventually enlisted the help of Davinder Sidhu, the principal assigned to Ms. Her’s 

office at the time. In approximately the 2016/2017 school year, the complaints were 

brought to Ms. Her’s attention. Based on Ms. Her’s review of the complaint history, she 

noticed respondent engaged in a pattern of poor judgment and decision-making, a 

lack of professionalism, and questionable professional and personal conduct. 

13.  Ms. Her met with respondent on November 30, 2016, to discuss some of 

the complaints against her. During that meeting, respondent discussed stepping down 

5

as the principal at Thomas. She agreed to provide Ms. Her and Katie Russell, the lead 

instructional superintendent for the District, her final decision the following week.

14. 

Respondent met with Ms. Her and Ms. Russell the following week, and 

informed them of her decision to step down as principal of Thomas at the end of the 

2016/2017 school year due to health and personal reasons. She requested 

reassignment to a position that would not require her to supervise or evaluate others. 

Prior to signing paperwork to implement her decision, however, respondent had 

questions for the District’s human resources department, and agreed to provide the 

completed paperwork no later than the following week. 

15.  On December 13, 2016, at 5:30 a.m. Ms. Her received the following text 

message from respondent: 

Sorry to text you so early. Was hoping to grab a quick 

morning chat with you. At Starbucks would do? Between 6 

and 7 . . . if that’s possible? Yes this is an emergency-you 

always ask that. It can’t wait until later. I wanted to talk to 

you before I start my day . . . hope you get this to meet with 

me before my 730 duty. 

16.  Ms. Her met with respondent at Starbucks that morning at 7:00 a.m. 

Respondent told Ms. Her she was having an affair with Jamarlin Lowe, the night 

custodian at Thomas. She explained the relationship began when she was the vice 

principal at Lawless and Mr. Lowe was “the NTA.”1 The relationship continued after she 

hired him as the night custodian at Thomas.

      

1 Noontime assignment.

6

17.

Respondent told Ms. Her the relationship with Mr. Lowe was now 

strained, and he was threatening to expose her “legal wrongdoings.” Respondent did 

not explain what she meant by “legal wrongdoings,” and Ms. Her did not press her 

because she appeared upset.

18.

Respondent expressed concerns over potential “legal ramifications” that 

could impact Thomas, and explained “I don’t want anything happening to me, to 

happen to people I love, especially the students at Thomas.” She disclosed she was 

experiencing personal issues, such as facing bankruptcy, having her wages garnished, 

the theft of her purse and keys, and the repossession of her car. She made vague 

references to people being “out to get” her, and questioned whether her office 

manager at Thomas, Stephanie Riley, and Mr. Lowe were conspiring against her. 

19. 

Based on respondent’s demeanor and emotions during the meeting, Ms. 

Her became concerned about respondent’s state of mind and mental health. She 

concluded it would not be safe for respondent to report to work that day, and 

instructed her to go home. 

20. 

After the meeting with respondent, Ms. Her contacted Ms. Russell and 

told her about the meeting. She subsequently contacted Kim Mecum and Paul 

Idsvoog, the District’s chief academic officer and chief of human resources and labor 

relations, respectively, and the decision was made to conduct a formal investigation 

into whether respondent engaged in an inappropriate relationship with Mr. Lowe. 

The District’s Investigation 

21. 

Steve Badilla is a licensed private investigator and the co-owner of 

Nation and Badilla Investigations. He is a retired assistant chief of the California 

7

Highway Patrol. His firm specializes in investigating allegations of employee 

misconduct. 

22.

On December 13, 2016, the District contacted Mr. Badilla and asked him 

to investigate the allegation that respondent engaged in an inappropriate relationship 

with Mr. Lowe. Mr. Badilla subsequently clarified that the District’s primary concern 

was respondent’s admission she had an affair with a subordinate employee. A 

secondary concern related to respondent’s assertion that Mr. Lowe threatened to 

expose her “legal wrongdoings.” Mr. Badilla was asked to determine whether 

respondent violated any District policies and what “legal wrongdoings” Mr. Lowe 

threatened to expose. 

JAMARLIN LOWE’S INTERVIEW AND SUBSEQUENT HEARING TESTIMONY

Interview with Mr. Badilla 

23.  Mr. Badilla interviewed Mr. Lowe in the presence of Vanessa Sanchez 

Reyes and Amelia Jones, the chief shop steward and shop steward, respectively, with 

Mr. Lowe’s union. Mr. Lowe has been the night custodian at Thomas since 2014, and 

works under the supervision of a night supervisor.

24. Mr. Lowe admitted knowing respondent, and described her as “my 

principal.” He also explained he worked with her when he was the athletic director at

Lawless and she was the vice principal.

25. When asked whether he was ever in a personal relationship with 

respondent, Mr. Lowe said “she is a friend of mine.” When pressed further, he declined 

to answer. And when told respondent acknowledged their personal relationship, he 

responded “I do not want to talk about that.”

8

26. Mr. Lowe was confronted with respondent’s allegation that he threatened 

to expose her illegal activity, and responded “that is 100 percent false.” He explained, 

“I have no ill intentions to do anything like that. I come to work, I do my job, I go 

home. That’s all I do.” When asked how he and respondent were currently getting 

along, he said “she’s a great person. I have no ill intentions. I have nothing bad to say 

about her. She is an awesome person.” 

Hearing Testimony 

27.  Mr. Lowe testified at hearing, and acknowledged having a prior romantic 

relationship with respondent. Although he did not specify when the relationship 

occurred, he said he did not find their relationship unethical at the time he applied for 

his current night custodian position at Thomas because by then it had been “years” 

since they had spoken. He refused to answer Mr. Badilla’s questions about his 

romantic relationship with respondent because he did not know who Ms. Sanchez 

Reyes and Ms. Jones were, and was uncomfortable discussing such a personal matter 

in front of two women he did not know. 

STEPHANIE RILEY’S INTERVIEW AND SUBSEQUENT HEARING TESTIMONY

Interview with Mr. Badilla 

28.  Ms. Riley was the office manager at Thomas when Mr. Badilla interviewed 

her. She was hired by respondent three years prior to the interview. 

29.  Ms. Riley explained that her relationship with respondent had been 

strained over the years, but Ms. Riley did not know why. At the beginning of the 

2016/2017 school year, respondent called Ms. Riley into her office and said one of 

9

them “had to go and that we shouldn’t be working together anymore.” Respondent 

further stated that she did not trust Ms. Riley anymore, so one of them should leave.

30.  Ms. Riley did not know the reasons for respondent’s animosity toward 

her. On one occasion, Ms. Riley told respondent that she could not say anything to 

change respondent’s mind about her, and respondent replied, “you’re right about 

that.” 

31.  Ms. Riley first met Mr. Lowe as the football coach at Thomas. He later 

became the school’s night custodian. Respondent had previously told Ms. Riley that 

respondent and Mr. Lowe “dated way back during her Lawless days.” 

32.  Ms. Riley concluded her interview by volunteering the following: 

My son is only eight months old but if he were going to 

school, I would not want him to come [to Thomas]. The 

environment here is terrible. The top trickles down to the 

bottom. It’s not a good place to be. The teachers won’t 

even come in here because they don’t want to deal with 

[respondent]. 

Hearing Testimony 

33.  Ms. Riley testified at hearing in a manner consistent with her interview 

with Mr. Badilla. She has since left Thomas, and is the office manager at Ahwahnee 

Elementary School as of the date of hearing. 

34.  Ms. Riley described her relationship with respondent when they worked 

together at Thomas as “rocky,” and explained that some days were good while others 

“were not so good.” Respondent told Ms. Riley on multiple occasions that she 

10

regretted hiring her; the first time respondent complained this way, she did so in front 

of another staff member.

35.

There were days on which respondent was not in a good mood, and she 

would take out her frustration on Ms. Riley and others by being loud, yelling, and 

being “snippy.” Once, respondent returned from a principals meeting and began 

yelling at Ms. Riley as soon as she entered the front door to the office. Respondent 

apparently learned information at the meeting that she felt Ms. Riley should have 

shared with her ahead of time. Respondent continued yelling at Ms. Riley as she 

walked from the front door to her personal office, and slammed the door behind her. 

Ms. Riley went into respondent’s office to find out what was wrong, but respondent 

refused her entry. 

36.  Ms. Riley reported respondent’s abusive and erratic behavior to Ms. 

Montague on multiple occasions. Eventually, she spoke directly with Ms. Her. She did 

not know what happened with her complaints, because she received no follow-up 

from Ms. Her or Ms. Montague. 

37. 

Respondent asked Ms. Riley to sit on the hiring panel for a night 

custodian position at Thomas; the panel included respondent and several other 

members. The hiring process involved panel members asking the candidates a 

predetermined set of questions, and each candidate earning points based on his or 

her responses. The total number of points awarded each candidate were tallied, and 

the candidates were ranked in descending order based on their scores. The panel 

members then discussed each candidate’s ranking and qualifications. If the panel did 

not reach a consensus about who should be hired, respondent made the final hiring 

decision. 

11

38. Mr. Lowe was one of the candidates who interviewed for the night 

custodian position. Respondent never disclosed her romantic relationship with him to 

the other members of the panel. Mr. Lowe was not the candidate who earned the 

highest number of points, and the panel recommended another candidate. 

Respondent did not accept the panel’s recommendation, and decided to hire Mr. 

Lowe. 

39.  Ms. Riley previously discussed with Mr. Padilla various allegations that 

respondent mishandled school funds, mistreated students, and mishandled or ignored 

parent complaints; she repeated these allegations at hearing. Her allegations were 

either based solely on hearsay or were unsupported by any specific examples. 

DEBORAH SCHLUETER’S INTERVIEW AND SUBSEQUENT HEARING TESTIMONY

40.  Ms. Schlueter has been the principal of Lawless for approximately 11 to

12 years as of the date of hearing. She hired respondent as her vice principal, and they 

began their tenure at Lawless on the same day. 

41. 

Respondent hired Mr. Lowe as the athletic director at Lawless without 

Ms. Schlueter’s knowledge. Ms. Schlueter did not learn of respondent’s and Mr. Lowe’s 

romantic relationship until about four months after he was hired.

42. Ms. Schlueter did not have any concerns about respondent’s and Mr. 

Lowe’s romantic relationship violating the District’s harassment policy, but there was 

one occasion on which respondent yelled at Mr. Lowe in a scolding manner at school. 

They were in respondent’s office, and respondent verbally reprimanded Mr. Lowe for 

doing something wrong. Afterward, Ms. Schlueter spoke with respondent and 

explained she should not have spoken with Mr. Lowe in the manner she did, and she 

should have handled the incident more professionally.

12

RESPONDENT’S INTERVIEW, SUBSEQUENT CORRESPONDENCE, AND HEARING 

TESTIMONY 

Interview with Mr. Badilla 

43. 

Respondent worked for the District for 20 years, the last three years and 

six months as the principal of Thomas, at the time of her interview with Mr. Badilla. She 

acknowledged being in an “on and off” romantic relationship with Mr. Lowe. 

44. 

Respondent met Mr. Lowe at a gas station in the summer of 2010. They 

exchanged telephone numbers, and began dating shortly thereafter. She was the vice 

principal of Lawless when they met, and she hired him as the school’s athletic director

shortly thereafter. She was his immediate supervisor.

45. 

Respondent described her relationship with Mr. Lowe as “intimate” when 

she hired him as the athletic director. She did not think the relationship created a 

conflict of interest when she hired him, “because there wasn’t anyone else competing 

for the position to be coach.” She did not consider whether hiring him would violate 

any rules about hiring a romantic partner, explaining “I wasn’t thinking about it in 

those terms. It was an extra pay contract and it was after school.” In retrospect, she 

conceded “I guess I just wasn’t thinking at the time.”

46.

In 2014, during her second year as principal of Thomas, respondent sat 

on an interview panel to hire a night custodian for the school. She did not recall 

receiving advance notice that Mr. Lowe applied for the position, and was surprised to 

see his name on the list of eligible candidates. When he appeared for his interview, she 

did not disclose her relationship with him to the other panel members. She did not 

complete a rating sheet for him, but did not excuse herself from participating in his 

interview. She ultimately hired him for the position. Respondent admitted that after 

13

Mr. Lowe was hired, they “crossed the line in terms of having, you know, sexual 

interaction.” 

47. 

Respondent said her relationship with Mr. Lowe was “strained” at the 

time of her interview, and Mr. Lowe threatened to expose her illegal activity. When Mr. 

Badilla asked her to explain what she was talking about, she described financial

difficulties she was facing, including wage garnishments and other efforts to collect 

personal debts.

48.

Respondent described her relationship with Ms. Riley as strained. She 

explained, Ms. Riley “doesn’t like me. I feel she might want to cause me pain because I 

caused her pain. I was open enough to say how I felt. The problems with Ms. Riley 

were not fixed. She never forgave me.” 

49.  Mr. Badilla asked respondent whether she is always cordial and 

professional to everyone at work, and she replied: “Oh, no. No. No. I think I would, you 

know, have to say that, I have that, the ghetto-ness sometimes comes out and, um, 

sometimes I definitely do things that I shouldn’t do.” When asked to elaborate, she 

explained: 

Um, I think that means that, like, you know, sometimes, you 

know, the kids will come in and, um, you know, you, you, 

you cross over the edge sometimes or, you know, if a, if a 

student comes too close if you put your hand there or you 

may push a student too hard or, um, if you sit down to 

something a student takes off running, like grab that 

student the wrong way and then sometimes you think 

about it or if you’re like trying to barricade a student and 

14

you want to keep them in your office you really don’t want 

them to run out but, you know, you don’t really want to be 

standing over them or hovering them. I mean, I think, that 

there’s always those times where maybe you’ve held a 

student too tight, um, you’ve grabbed the student the 

wrong way. I, I haven’t use the CPI that you’re supposed to 

use when you’re holding a student. Or there’s times when 

you’re sitting there talking to a student and you’re, like, 

“you may not say that,” and your voice got louder than it’s 

supposed to be and it’s like, ugh, maybe I’m not supposed 

to do that because I have a loud voice anyways and you 

know there’s been times when students have went home 

and told their parents that I yelled at them and it’s like, you 

know, I, I have to try and say well I do have a loud voice I 

mean there’s staff members that have told Misty several 

times that I’ve yelled at them. It’s almost like, Misty, I, I 

honestly feel that I’m not consciously yelling at people. Um, 

I do have a loud voice, like you probably have noticed just 

with this conversation my voice has gotten lows sometimes 

my voice has come up, but, I mean, I don’t know, I guess it’s 

just a part of my demeanor when I get to a level of 

comfortableness, when I get to a level that touches my 

heart, when I get to a level of passion, my voice level will 

always changes and . . . 

50. 

Respondent denied ever losing her temper with a staff member or a 

coworker, but admitted “I’ve definitely crossed the line.” She described an incident 

15

when a tow truck driver was attempting to tow a staff member’s car from Thomas’s 

parking lot on a morning when it was raining and there was a backlog of cars trying to 

drop students off. She asked the tow truck driver to move his truck so cars could get 

around him and drop students off. He responded, “Get your, get your damn ass away 

from, I’m gonna, I’m gonna tow this tow truck [

] whether you like it or not, so get 

your damn ass away from over here.” Respondent replied, “Get your fat fucking ass out 

of my parking lot.” Respondent admitted she lost her temper with the tow truck driver, 

but attempted to justify her actions by explaining she had a line of cars in her parking 

lot and students who were late. 

51. 

Respondent concluded her interview with Mr. Badilla by explaining she 

loved the District, but there were times she felt she was being illegally recorded by 

people acting on behalf of the District. She believed the recordings were made when 

she was having conversations with her teachers, disciplining students, or talking to 

different staff members. She did not know who specifically was recording her, and 

explained “I always had the deep down gut feeling that I was being recorded.”

Correspondence to the Commission 

52. 

Respondent contradicted portions of her interview with Mr. Badilla in her 

April 16, 2018 correspondence to the Commission. She told Mr. Badilla her relationship 

with Mr. Lowe continued after she hired him as the night custodian at Thomas. But she 

wrote in her subsequent correspondence to the Commission that her relationship with 

Mr. Lowe ended prior to his being hired as the night custodian at Thomas. She also 

wrote that she did not make the hiring decision, but “the panel submitted his name for 

hire.” 

16

53.

Two months later, respondent sent the Commission additional 

correspondence claiming that Ms. Schlueter hired Mr. Lowe as a coach at Lawless 

based on respondent’s recommendation, and he reported to the school’s athletic 

director. She further claimed that her romantic relationship with Mr. Lowe ended by 

the time she left Lawless. Respondent told Mr. Badilla she hired him as Lawless’s 

athletic director, and he reported directly to her. She admitted to Mr. Badilla her 

romantic relationship with Mr. Lowe continued after she hired him as the custodian at 

Thomas. 

Hearing Testimony 

54. 

Respondent also provided contradictory testimony at hearing. She was 

adamant that she conferred with Ms. Schlueter about the propriety of hiring Mr. Lowe 

before offering him the athletic director position at Lawless. She explained that 

everything she did as a vice principal went through Ms. Schlueter as the principal. And 

while she admitted she was in a “sexual relationship” with Mr. Lowe when she hired 

him as athletic director, she said “we had a professional relationship” after he was 

hired as the night custodian at Thomas. Respondent admitted the opposite was true 

during her interview with Mr. Badilla.

55.

Respondent also contradicted herself while testifying. She was adamant 

that she always carried herself as a professional at both Lawless and Thomas, and she 

always made sure to treat staff, students, and parents with respect. She said she was 

never intentionally discourteous to staff, a parent, or a student. However, she also 

admitted there came a point in time when she saw herself doing things “I felt was out 

of character.” She specifically referenced the verbal altercation with the tow truck 

driver and her poor relationship with Ms. Riley. She denied having ever told Ms. Riley 

she wished she never hired her, and was mystified why Ms. Riley would say otherwise.

17

56.

Respondent opined at hearing that she was not in the “right state of 

mind” to be truthful during the December 13, 2016 meeting with Ms. Her and the 

subsequent interview with Mr. Badilla. However, she explained she has since gained a 

better understanding of her major depression disorder and obtained the appropriate 

treatment to allow her to testify truthfully at hearing. 

57. 

Respondent referenced Ms. Her’s testimony that respondent requested 

to meet prior to reporting to work on December 13, 2016, as an example of something 

respondent previously said that “does not make sense,” explaining she was scheduled 

to meet a bankruptcy attorney that morning and did not intend to go to work after 

meeting with Ms. Her. But respondent later testified she could not understand why she 

would have told Ms. Her she was going to see a bankruptcy attorney because she did 

not have any debt at the time. 

Mario Gomez’s and Gina Miccio’s Testimony 

58.  Mr. Gomez was coaching sports at Thomas when respondent was 

appointed the school’s principal. He introduced himself after she started, and “we got 

along well that first year.” But respondent made changes beginning in her second year 

at Thomas. 

59.  Mr. Gomez was used to buying whatever equipment, drinks, and ice he 

needed for the teams he coached and submitting receipts to the school’s booster club 

for reimbursement. Respondent changed that process to require Mr. Gomez to obtain 

her permission prior to making any purchases. 

60.  Mr. Gomez followed respondent’s process until one time when the 

football team traveled to another school for a game, and there was no ice or bottled 

water. He typically brought a cooler full of ice and bottled water to away games, 

18

because football season started at the beginning of the school year and it often 

remained hot during the first several weeks of the season. When he asked respondent 

for permission to purchase ice and bottled water, she replied that the students did not 

need ice and could drink from the drinking fountain. Mr. Gomez later saw a member of 

the booster club on campus, and the member authorized Mr. Gomez to purchase ice 

and bottled water and seek reimbursement from the booster club. 

61.  One year, the District gave each school $5,000 to spend on its athletics 

program. Mr. Gomez requested new football jerseys because the ones the school 

owned were too big for the students, since they were meant to be worn over shoulder 

pads; however, the students did not wear shoulder pads. Respondent approved 

spending $480 to replace only jerseys that were missing from the team’s inventory. 

Overall, she spent approximately $1,100 of the $5,000 allocated by the District for 

Thomas’s athletics program.

62.  Mr. Gomez recognized that Thomas’s sports program was not a priority 

for respondent. He never saw her at any practices or home games. The school’s 

volleyball and softball teams qualified for playoffs “a couple of times,” but respondent 

never attended any of those games. 

63. 

Respondent once delayed selecting members of the cross-country team 

until after the season had started, the first event had passed, and there was insufficient 

time for a team to practice before the next event. When Mr. Gomez questioned her 

delay, she said the sports program was “not important.” He responded that this was 

not her decision to make, but she insisted it was her decision as the school’s principal. 

He quit coaching sports at Thomas after that conversation.

19

64. Ms. Miccio testified that her son started kindergarten at Thomas the 

same year respondent was appointed as principal. Ms. Miccio immediately became 

involved with the school’s booster club, a parent/teacher organization that raises 

money to help fund field trips, other school events, and anything else the District did 

not, or could not, pay for. 

65. 

During respondent’s second year as principal at Thomas, Ms. Miccio 

began noticing clashes between members of the booster club and respondent. 

Respondent began requesting funding from the booster club. Although the booster 

club rarely denied a request for funding, respondent’s requests were unusual and 

unnecessary. 

66. 

Respondent changed the process for requesting funds from the booster 

club. Originally, teachers submitted requests directly to the booster club’s box at the 

school. But respondent demanded that all requests be submitted to her for approval, 

and she submitted only those she approved to the booster club for consideration. This 

created conflicts between teachers and booster club members, because teachers made 

requests that the booster club never received. The teachers approached individual 

booster club members to ask about their requests, but because the members never 

received those requests they knew nothing about them. 

67. 

After the booster club denied some of respondent’s requests for funding, 

she began holding school fundraisers at the same time the booster club traditionally 

held its fundraisers. This created conflicts because the booster club and respondent 

were competing for families’ money. Thomas is located in a lower socioeconomic area, 

and families began complaining about the school’s and booster club’s increased 

pressure on them to donate funds. 

20

Application for a Certificate

68.

A majority of the students in the West Park School District speak a 

language other than English as their primary language, and the school district requires 

all teachers to possess a crosscultural, language and academic development certificate. 

Respondent completed the classwork necessary for obtaining the certificate, but never 

processed her application. She then applied for a Certificate when she was hired to 

teach at West Park Elementary School. She explained at hearing, however, that the 

application is now moot, because the Certificate would have been issued for West Park 

Elementary School only, and she no longer teaches there. She would need to start the 

application process over if she needs a crosscultural, language and academic 

development certificate in the future. 

Allegation Respondent Resigned in Lieu of Discipline 

69. 

The District placed respondent on paid administrative leave, effective 

December 13, 2016, during the pendency of Mr. Badilla’s investigation “in an effort to 

ensure the integrity of the impending investigation.” The parties subsequently entered 

into an agreement whereby respondent voluntarily resigned from the District.

70.

On July 11, 2017, the District reported respondent’s change of 

employment status to the Commission pursuant to California Code of Regulations, title 

5, section 80303, subdivision (a)(2). However, there was no evidence respondent 

resigned “as a result of an allegation of misconduct or while an allegation of 

misconduct [was] pending.”

71.

In fact, the parties’ agreement states that respondent “voluntarily” 

resigned from the District, without either party admitting liability. Furthermore, the 

agreement specifies that any prospective employers inquiring about respondent’s 

21

employment history with the District shall be directed “to an HR Administrator in the 

District’s Human Resources Department.” That person is limited to disclosing 

respondent’s “dates of employment, her last position held, that resignation was 

voluntary and the date she tendered her resignation was June 30, 2017.” 

Character Evidence

72.

Respondent introduced several character letters, including letters written 

by each of her three children, former coworkers, and parents of former students. All 

the authors expressed an awareness of the Commission’s allegations against 

respondent in general terms, but none discussed any of the allegations in detail. Each 

author described respondent’s character and demeanor in laudatory terms. 

73. 

Respondent called Amber McCorvey and Linda Jalhayan as character 

witnesses at hearing. Ms. McCorvey’s children attended Lawless and Thomas while 

respondent was the vice principal of the former and the principal of the latter. Ms. 

Jalhayan knows respondent because respondent was the vice principle of Lawless

when Ms. Jalhayan’s child attended. Both witnesses discussed seeing respondent’s 

daily interactions with students, parents, and staff, and explained she always acted 

professionally, made everyone feel welcome on campus, and made sure students knew 

where they were supposed to go. Ms. McCorvey described the culture respondent 

created at Thomas as “more like a family than just a school,” and explained parents 

formed “friendships and bonds” with each other because of the culture respondent 

created.

74.

Charles Brown also testified as a character witness on behalf of 

respondent. He met respondent at church five to six years ago. Shortly after they met,

respondent asked Mr. Brown if he was interested in coaching the track team at 

22

Thomas. While he had prior coaching experience, he had never coached track. 

Nonetheless, he accepted respondent’s offer. He described his experience coaching 

track as “amazing,” and explained he felt “comfortable” with respondent and 

“supported” by her. He described her as a professional who treats everyone equally, 

explaining he initially thought he would get special privileges because of their prior 

relationship from church. However, he did not. 

Discussion 

RESPONDENT’S MISCONDUCT 

75. 

The persuasive evidence established respondent began a romantic 

relationship with Mr. Lowe in the summer of 2010 while she was the vice principal of 

Lawless. Shortly thereafter, she hired him as the school’s athletic director, a position 

that reported directly to her, while still in a romantic relationship. She did not obtain 

Ms. Schlueter’s permission or disclose the existence of the romantic relationship prior 

to hiring respondent.

76.

Three years later, while serving as the principal of Thomas, respondent 

sat on an interview panel for the hiring of a full-time night custodian for the school. 

Mr. Lowe appeared before the panel as a candidate for the position. Respondent did 

not complete a rating sheet for Mr. Lowe, but remained in the room during his 

interview and did not disclose to the other panel members that she was currently in a

romantic relationship with him. She then unilaterally hired Mr. Lowe for the position.

77.

Respondent’s evidence to the contrary was not persuasive. She admitted 

to Mr. Badilla and at hearing that she was in a romantic relationship with Mr. Lowe 

when she hired him as the athletic director at Lawless. Ms. Schlueter confirmed Mr. 

23

Lowe was hired without her knowledge or permission, and Ms. Riley confirmed 

respondent told her respondent dated Mr. Lowe “during her Lawless days.”

78. 

Respondent’s testimony that she had a “professional relationship” with 

Mr. Lowe when she hired him as the night custodian at Thomas was belied by her 

admission to Mr. Badilla that they “crossed the line in terms of having, you know, 

sexual interaction” after he was hired. Mr. Lowe’s testimony that he had not spoken to 

respondent in “years” when he was hired at Thomas was not persuasive because the 

evidence established they had an “on and off” romantic relationship from the summer 

of 2010 until after he was hired at Thomas. 

79. 

The persuasive evidence further established respondent has an autocratic 

leadership style. Mr. Gomez’s and Ms. Miccio’s testimony about the changes 

respondent implemented to how athletic equipment and supplies were purchased and 

requests for funding were submitted to the booster club was uncontested and 

persuasive. Respondent’s decision to hold competing fundraisers after her requests for 

funding were denied was indicative of her attempts to maintain ultimate control over 

what happened at her school. 

80. 

There was evidence that the panel members as a whole, as opposed to 

respondent individually, made the decision to hire Mr. Lowe as the night custodian at 

Thomas. But it was undisputed the panel was formed to fill a position at the school 

where respondent was the principal, and she did nothing to disclose her romantic 

relationship with Mr. Lowe or otherwise disassociate herself from the hiring process. 

Mr. Lowe’s qualifications for the position and who made the actual hiring decision are 

irrelevant, because respondent held a position of influence over the hiring process and 

did nothing to minimize her influence, regardless of whether she actually exercised 

that influence.

24

81.

The persuasive evidence further established respondent has a history of 

poor and discourteous treatment of staff, students, and members of the community. 

Ms. Riley persuasively described instances of respondent treating her in a discourteous 

and insolent manner by repeatedly expressing regret over her decision to hire her, and 

by shouting at her following a principals meeting.

82.  Ms. Riley persuasively described the “toxic” environment respondent 

created at Thomas. She persuasively described occasions on which respondent was not 

in a good mood and would take her frustrations out on Ms. Riley and others.

83.  While respondent’s character witnesses described her as professional and 

creating a welcoming environment on campus, the evidence as a whole established 

otherwise. Respondent conceded she is not always cordial and professional to 

everyone at work for reasons unwarranted by the circumstances, and “lost [her] 

temper” with a tow truck driver in front of parents and students. She admittedly

grabbed students the wrong way, held them too tight, and talked to them in an 

inappropriate manner. She attempted to justify the manner in which she speaks with 

people by explaining she has “a loud voice,” and “it’s just a part of my demeanor” 

when talking about something she is passionate about. 

84. 

The Commission may take adverse action against a credential only when 

the underlying conduct demonstrates an unfitness to teach.2 (See 

FITNESS TO TEACH 

      

2 "A 'credential' includes a credential, certificate, life document, life diploma, 

permit, certificate of clearance, or waiver issued by the commission." (Ed. Code, §

44002.) 

25

(2010) 184 Cal.App.4th 462, 473.) “A teacher 

whose credential is being investigated for possible adverse action is per se unfit to 

teach only when the teacher has been convicted of a crime which the Legislature has 

declared requires the imposition of automatic sanctions on that teacher’s credentials. 

[Citations.] In all other circumstances, fitness to teach is a question of ultimate fact. 

[Citations.]” (

, at P. 475.) 

85. 

The California Supreme Court has delineated factors for determining 

whether particular conduct demonstrates an unfitness to teach. (See 

(1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 229-230 [analyzing former Ed. Code, § 13202, 

predecessor to Ed. Code, § 44421].) The Commission adopted the 

 factors by 

enacting California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80302. “Only the pertinent 

 factors need to be analyzed.” (

, 

, 184 Cal.App.4th at p. 476.)

Adverse Effect of Respondent’s Conduct 

86. 

Students are impressionable, and many try to emulate their teachers and 

principals. Therefore, it is essential that an educator’s behavior be beyond reproach, 

and she be capable of exercising sound judgment. Respondent’s decision to hire Mr. 

Lowe while engaged in a romantic relationship with him on two separate occasions 

demonstrated behavior inimical to the well-being of students and an extreme lack of 

judgment.

87.

Being an effective educator requires one to command the respect of 

others, and being an effective administrator even more so. But one cannot gain the 

respect of others if she does not show respect herself. Respondent’s mistreatment of 

26

Ms. Riley, the tow truck driver, and students demonstrated a complete lack of respect 

for their feelings.

88.

The ability to foster productive relationships with others is essential to 

being an effective educator and leader. Respondent’s autocratic leadership style 

demonstrated a lack of understanding of the need for that ability, and an 

unwillingness to develop that skill. Additionally, an effective leader supports the 

endeavors of those she leads. Respondent’s attitude towards school sports and the 

booster club showed a lack of interest and support for causes that are not her own. 

89. 

Respondent’s conduct as a whole portrayed the teaching profession in a 

negative manner, and had the potential of portraying others in the profession in a 

similar light by association.

Types of Credentials 

90. 

Respondent’s teaching credential authorizes her to teach all subjects in a 

self-contained classroom. (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80003, subd. (a).) In other words, 

she may be the only teacher the students assigned to her have for the duration of such 

assignment. Therefore, it is even more imperative that she exemplify the behavior 

society wants emulated by students, possess sound judgment, have respect for, and 

command respect of, others, and be able to foster productive relationships. The fact 

that her administrative services credential and certificate of eligibility allow her to 

develop and assess educational programs, manage school sites, hire and discipline 

certificated and classified employees, and discipline students makes it all the more 

essential that she possess those character traits. (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, §§ 80054, subd. 

(f), & 80054.5, subd. (b).)

27

91.

An emergency crosscultural, language and academic development 

certificate authorizes the holder to provide instruction on English language 

development to English learners “in preschool, kindergarten, grades 1 to 12, inclusive.” 

(Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, §§ 80015.2, subd. (b), & 80024.8, subd. (c).) An educator 

working with English learners has an even greater potential for influencing the 

development of her students, and it is essential that she possess all of the character 

traits of an effective educator.

Extenuating or Aggravating Circumstances

92. 

An “’aggravating factor’ is an event or circumstance which demonstrates 

that a greater degree of adverse action for an act of professional misconduct is 

needed to adequately protect the public, schoolchildren or the profession.” (Cal. Code 

Regs., tit. 5, § 80300, subd. (b).) And while neither the Education Code nor the 

regulations adopted by the Commission specify what constitutes an “extenuating 

circumstance,” a “mitigating factor” is the opposite of an aggravating factor — an 

occurrence which demonstrates that a lesser degree of adverse action or no adverse 

action is required to ensure proper protection. (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80300, subd. 

(m).)

93.

Respondent’s multiple acts of misconduct constitute an aggravating 

factor. (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80300, subd. (b)(2).) Also, she was not forthright when 

discussing her misconduct with Ms. Her during the December 13, 2016 meeting, 

during her interview with Mr. Badilla, in correspondence to the Commission, and at 

hearing. Her lack of candor constitutes an aggravating factor. (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 

80300, subd. (b)(3).)

28

94.

The evidence of aggravating factors outweighed evidence of any 

mitigating factors, such as the absence of prior discipline by the Commission and any 

evidence of respondent’s depression. (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80300, subd. (m)(1) & 

(3).) Additionally, there was insufficient evidence that respondent’s depression 

“substantially contributed to [her] misconduct.” (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80300, subd. 

(m)(1)(3).) 

Likelihood of Recurrence 

95. 

Respondent’s lack of openness and candor demonstrated a lack of 

insight into the wrongfulness of her conduct. This failure to appreciate her missteps 

indicates a greater likelihood of recurrence.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

Applicable Burden/Standard of Proof 

DISCIPLINE OF RESPONDENT’S CREDENTIALS

1.

Complainant has the burden of proving the grounds for discipline 

alleged in the Accusation, and she must do so by clear and convincing evidence to a 

reasonable certainty. (

(1983) 33 Cal.3d 532, 

536 [an administrative agency seeking to discipline a license has the burden of proving 

the grounds for discipline alleged in the accusation]; see 

 (1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1036, 1039-1040 [recognizing that the 

clear and convincing evidence standard applies to disciplining a credential].) “The 

courts have defined clear and convincing evidence as evidence which is so clear as to 

leave no substantial doubt and as sufficiently strong to command the unhesitating 

29

assent of every reasonable mind [citations]. It has been said that a preponderance calls 

for probability, while clear and convincing proof demands a high probability 

[citations].” (

(1978) 83 Cal.App.3d 890, 899; italics omitted.) 

ELIGIBILITY FOR A CERTIFICATE

2.

Respondent has the burden of proving she is eligible for a Certificate, 

and she must do so by a preponderance of the evidence. (

 (2006) 139 Cal.App.4th 471, 476 [the party against whom a 

statement of issues is filed bears the burden of proof regarding the issues raised in the 

pleading]; see Evid. Code, § 115 [”Except as otherwise provided by law, the burden of 

proof requires proof by a preponderance of the evidence”].) This evidentiary standard 

requires respondent to produce evidence of such weight that, when balanced against 

evidence to the contrary, is more persuasive. (

 (2009) 171 Cal.App.4th 1549, 1567.) In other words, respondent needs 

to prove it is more likely than not that she is eligible for a Certificate. (

(1984) 160 Cal.App.3d 314, 320.) 

Applicable Law 

3. 

The Commission may deny the application for a credential submitted by 

one who “has committed any act involving moral turpitude.” (Ed. Code, § 44345, subd. 

(e).) The Commission may discipline a credential “for immoral or unprofessional 

conduct, . . . or for any cause that would have warranted the denial of an application 

for a credential or the renewal thereof, or for evident unfitness for service.” (Ed. Code, 

§ 44421.)

4. 

The California Supreme Court has recognized that the terms “immoral 

conduct” and “unprofessional conduct” substantially overlap one another and that 

30

conduct which constitutes one, often includes the other. (See 

, 

, 1 Cal.3d 214, 221, fn. 9.) “Unprofessional conduct” includes “’that 

which violates the rules or ethical code of a profession or such conduct which is 

unbecoming a member of a profession in good standing.’” (

In describing what constitutes “immoral conduct” within the context of the Education 

 (1953) 41 Cal.2d 546, 553; quoting 66 Corpus Juris, p. 55.) 

Code, the court in 

(1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, said: 

In 

, 36 Cal.2d 734, at page 

740 [227 P.2d 449], the Supreme Court quotes with 

approval the following statement from Words and Phrases, 

permanent edition, volume 20, pages 159-160: “The term 

‘immoral’ has been defined generally as that which is hostile 

to the welfare of the general public and contrary to good 

morals. Immorality has not been confined to sexual matters, 

but includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or 

indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; 

or as willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral 

indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the 

community, and as an inconsiderate attitude toward good 

order and the public welfare.”

(

Cal.App.2d at p. 811.)

, 

, 179 

31

5.

The court in 

 (2011) 194 Cal.App.4th 1454, said the following about the 

definition of immoral or unprofessional conduct: 

Moreover, the definition of immoral or unprofessional 

conduct must be considered in conjunction with the unique 

position of public school teachers, upon whom are imposed 

“responsibilities and limitations on freedom of action which 

do not exist in regard to other callings.” [Citation.] 

(

at p. 1466.)

, 

, 

6.

And while “conduct constituting ‘evident unfitness for service’ will often 

constitute ‘unprofessional conduct[,]’ . . . the converse is not true.” (

(1992) 2 

Cal.App.4th 1429, 1445.) “’Evident unfitness for service’ requires that unfitness for 

service be attributable to a defect in temperament — a requirement not necessary for 

a finding of ‘unprofessional conduct.’” (

) 

7. 

The following has been said about the analysis for determining whether 

particular conduct constitutes sufficient cause for taking adverse action against a 

credential:

, 66 Cal.App. 157, 168 [225 

P. 783], quoted in 

, 41 Cal.2d 

546, 553-554 [261 P.2d 261], found that the standards for 

judging the propriety of a teacher’s conduct, and the extent 

to which that conduct may be the basis for the revocation 

32

of a credential, involves many aspects. “. . . the teacher is 

entrusted with the custody of children and their high 

preparation for useful life. His habits, his speech, his good 

name, his cleanliness, the wisdom and propriety of his 

unofficial utterances, his associations, all are involved. His 

ability to inspire children and to govern them, his power as 

a teacher, and the character for which he stands are matters 

of major concern in a teacher’s selection and retention.” 

(

(1972) 22 Cal.App.3d 988, 991.)

Cause for Denial/Discipline 

8. 

Considering the factual findings as a whole, respondent’s misconduct 

described in Factual Findings 75, 76, 79, 81, and 82 constituted “act[s] involving moral 

turpitude.” Such misconduct demonstrated an unfitness to teach for the reasons 

explained in Factual Findings 84 through 95. Therefore, cause exists to deny her 

application for an Emergency Crosscultural, Language and Academic Certificate 

pursuant to Education Code section 44345, subdivision (e).

9.

For the reasons explained in Legal Conclusion 8, cause also exists to 

discipline respondent’s teaching credential, administrative services credential, and 

certificate of eligibility pursuant to Education Code section 44421, as that statute 

relates to Education Code section 44345, subdivision (e).

10.

Respondent’s misconduct described in Factual Findings 75, 76, 79, 81, 

and 82 also constituted unprofessional conduct. Such unprofessional conduct

demonstrated an unfitness to teach for the reasons explained in Factual Findings 84 

through 95. Therefore, cause exists to discipline respondent’s teaching credential, 

33

administrative services credential, and certificate of eligibility pursuant to Education 

Code section 44421. 

11. 

Respondent’s misconduct described in Factual Findings 75, 76, 79, 81, 

and 82 also constituted immoral conduct. Such immoral conduct demonstrated an 

unfitness to teach for the reasons explained in Factual Findings 84 through 95. 

Therefore, cause exists to discipline respondent’s teaching credential, administrative 

services credential, and certificate of eligibility pursuant to Education Code section 

44421. 

12. 

Respondent’s misconduct described in Factual Findings 75, 76, 79, 81, 

and 82 also demonstrated evident unfitness for service for reasons attributable to a 

temperamental defect. Such misconduct demonstrated an unfitness to teach for the 

reasons explained in Factual Findings 84 through 95. Therefore, cause exists to 

discipline respondent’s teaching credential, administrative services credential, and 

certificate of eligibility pursuant to Education Code section 44421. 

Conclusion 

13.

Cause exists to deny respondent’s application for an Emergency 

Crosscultural, Language and Academic Certificate for the reasons explained in Legal 

Conclusion 8. Cause also exists to discipline her Clear Multiple Subject Teaching 

Credential with an authorization in General Subjects, Clear Administrative Services 

Credential, and Administrative Services Credential — Certificate of Eligibility for the 

reasons explained in Legal Conclusions 9 through 12, individually and collectively. 

When all the evidence is considered, respondent did not produce sufficient evidence 

to provide the assurances necessary to justify issuing her a Certificate. Nor did she 

introduce sufficient evidence of her continued fitness to perform the duties authorized 

34

under any of her credentials or her certificate of eligibility. Therefore, her application

for an Emergency Crosscultural, Language and Academic Certificate should be denied, 

and her Clear Multiple Subject Teaching Credential with an authorization in General 

Subjects, Clear Administrative Services Credential, and Administrative Services 

Credential — Certificate of Eligibility should be revoked.

ORDER 

1. 

Respondent Reba Chonell Joyner’s application for an Emergency 

Crosscultural, Language and Academic Certificate dated April 9, 2018, is DENIED.

2. 

The Clear Multiple Subject Teaching Credential with an authorization in 

General Subjects issued respondent Reba Chonell Joyner on December 17, 1994, is 

REVOKED. 

3. 

The Administrative Services Credential — Certificate of Eligibility issued 

respondent Reba Chonell Joyner on May 19, 2005, is REVOKED. 

4. 

The Clear Administrative Services Credential issued respondent Reba 

Chonell Joyner on August 1, 2007 is REVOKED.

DATE: January 23, 2020

COREN D. WONG

Administrative Law Judge

Office of Administrative Hearings

 

35

