BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Petition to Revoke Probation Against: 

JOHN HILLIARD SINGH, Respondent 

Agency Case No. 1-215141274 

OAH Case No. 2020090129 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Wim van Rooyen, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ), Office of Administrative 

Hearings (OAH), State of California, heard this matter by videoconference on January 

13 and 14, 2021, from Sacramento, California. 

Kristina T. Jarvis, Deputy Attorney General, represented Mary Vixie Sandy, Ed.D 

(complainant), Executive Director, California Commission on Teacher Credentialing 

(Commission). 

Ernest H. Tuttle, IV, Attorney at Law, represented John Hilliard Singh

(respondent), who was present at hearing. 

Evidence was received, the record closed, and the matter submitted for decision 

on January 14, 2021.

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Credential 

Current Discipline 

1.

On July 1, 2017, the Commission issued respondent’s current Clear Single 

Subject Teaching Credential with Music and English authorizations (credential). The 

credential will expire on July 1, 2022, unless renewed or revoked. 

2. 

On November 15, 2017, complainant, in her official capacity, filed an 

Accusation seeking to discipline respondent’s credential based on alleged 

unprofessional conduct, immoral conduct, commission of acts involving moral 

turpitude, and evident unfitness for service. More specifically, complainant alleged 

that, on March 18, 2015, respondent conducted a music class at Cypress Elementary 

School (Cypress) in Tulare, California. When a fourth-grade student disrupted the class, 

respondent grabbed the student’s shirt near the shoulder area, dragged the student

by his shirt to a new place to sit in front of the class, and roughly sat the student 

down.  

3. 

The matter proceeded to hearing before ALJ John DeCure on May 29, 

2018. On July 13, 2018, Judge DeCure issued a Proposed Decision concluding that 

complainant established by clear and convincing evidence that respondent had 

inappropriately physically handled the Cypress student. Judge DeCure found 

unpersuasive respondent’s testimony denying that “anything at all had happened,” 

branding the student witnesses as “liars,” and accusing the other teachers and 

administrators as “harboring biases against him.” Judge DeCure further concluded that 

respondent’s conduct constituted unprofessional conduct and demonstrated evident 

2

unfitness for service, but did not amount to immoral conduct or acts involving moral 

turpitude. 

Additionally, Judge DeCure found the existence of aggravating circumstances in 

the form of prior written warnings and reprimands, as follows: 

(a) 

On March 10, 2010, the Central Unified School District (Central Unified), a 

previous employer, issued a Letter of Concern to respondent regarding an incident in 

which he hugged a female student. Respondent was directed not to engage in 

inappropriate physical contact with students and to maintain a “hands off” approach.  

(b) 

On June 6, 2012, Central Unified issued a Letter of Reprimand to 

respondent for making inappropriate statements of a sexual nature to another district 

employee. This issue involved respondent commenting to a female teacher about her 

feet and toes, and later revealing to her that he had a “foot fetish.” Although the other 

teacher was not offended, she requested to have no further contact with respondent. 

(c) 

On November 30, 2012, Central Unified issued a Letter of Reprimand to 

respondent for touching two female students on the cheek, placing his hands on their 

hands, and rubbing their faces while instructing them in music. Respondent was again 

directed to refrain from physically touching students.  

(d)

On December 3, 2012, Central Unified issued a 45/90 Day Notice for 

Unprofessional Conduct and Unsatisfactory Performance to respondent for the 

incidents described in (a) through (c), and for his reported ongoing physical touching 

of students while instructing them in music.

(e) 

On June 12, 2013, Central Unified issued a Letter of Concern to 

respondent regarding the above-stated concerns. 

3

Based on the foregoing, Judge DeCure analyzed the factors outlined in 

(1969) 1 Cal.3d 214 and adopted by California 

Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80302 (

 factors); found that respondent’s 

conduct demonstrated unfitness to teach; and determined that cause existed to 

discipline his credential. 

Judge DeCure concluded that outright revocation of respondent’s credential 

was unwarranted. Instead, the public could be adequately protected by staying 

revocation of respondent’s credential and imposing a three-year period of probation, 

including the following conditions:  

[¶] . . . [¶]  

2. Respondent shall fully comply with the terms and 

conditions of this order and cooperate with representatives 

of the Commission in its monitoring and investigation of his 

compliance. Any credentials issued to respondent during 

the period of probation shall be subject to the conditions 

contained herein. 

[¶] . . . [¶]  

4. During the period of probation, respondent shall 

maintain a strict “hands off” policy, refraining from making 

physical contact with students except in the event of a 

medical or student-safety emergency. 

[¶] . . . [¶]  

4

10. The Commission shall retain jurisdiction over 

respondent’s case during the period of probation. If 

respondent violates any term or condition of this Order, 

after giving him written notice and an opportunity to be 

heard on the issue of his violation of probation, the 

Commission may set aside the stay order and impose the 

suspension of respondent’s credential. If an accusation or 

petition to revoke probation is filed against respondent 

during probation, the probation period shall automatically 

be extended until a final decision is made on the accusation 

or petition. 

[¶] . . . [¶] 

Finally, Judge DeCure emphasized that:  

[T]he simple issue of treating students in a “hands off” 

manner has eluded respondent, who has yet to grasp that 

“hands off” is an unequivocal directive, not a judgment-call 

issue subject to his personal discretion. Respondent has yet 

to accept responsibility for his conduct or take concrete, 

appropriate steps to guard against its recurrence. To 

succeed going forward, he must do so now. 

4. 

On October 5, 2018, the Commission adopted Judge DeCure’s Proposed 

Decision, which became effective November 4, 2018. Respondent did not seek further 

review of the Commission’s decision, which became final.  

5

Conduct on Probation 

5.

Pursuant to the Commission’s decision, respondent’s probation period 

started on November 4, 2018, and was scheduled to end November 3, 2021. His case 

was assigned for probation compliance monitoring to Berenice Oseguera, a 

Commission Special Investigator, who testified at hearing.  

6. 

Ms. Oseguera mailed respondent a packet of probation documentation 

and conducted a telephonic orientation with respondent on December 7, 2018. At the 

orientation, she reviewed, and answered respondent’s questions concerning, his 

probation terms. Respondent specifically asked her if the “hands off” policy still 

permitted him to “high five” his students, and she responded no, because it did not fall 

under the exception of a medical or student-safety emergency. 

7. 

According to Ms. Oseguera, respondent was compliant with all 

conditions of probation, except for conduct underlying a complaint filed by one of 

respondent’s students, A.M. concerning a May 11, 2019 incident, discussed below.  

MAY 11, 2019 INCIDENT 

8.

A.M. testified at hearing. A.M. is currently in high school, but in May 2019 

was a 13-year-old, seventh-grade student in respondent’s soprano/alto choir class at 

Divisadero Middle School (Divisadero) in the Visalia Unified School District (VUSD).  

9. 

On Saturday, May 11, 2019, A.M.’s choir and two other Divisadero choirs 

went on a field trip to Valencia, California to participate in a choir competition and visit 

Six Flags Magic Mountain (Six Flags), where the competition awards ceremony was set 

to take place. The field trip involved approximately 70 students and several 

chaperones, who were transported by two school buses. 

6

10.

A.M.’s choir won second place at the competition. At the awards 

ceremony, A.M. became emotional when another student, with whom A.M. had 

previously had conflict, was selected to accept the award on behalf of A.M.’s choir. 

Respondent asked A.M. why she was upset and whether she was OK. When A.M. 

explained why she was upset, respondent asked whether she was “on medication,” 

which A.M. found offensive. 

11. 

Around 7:00 or 8:00 p.m. that evening, the buses left Six Flags to return 

to Visalia. A.M.’s bus had one central aisle, with two seats on either side of the aisle. 

A.M. sat towards the center of the bus, in a left side window seat. No one was seated 

next to her on the left side aisle seat, but two other students were seated across the 

aisle in the right side aisle and window seats. Respondent was not on A.M.’s bus when 

the buses departed Six Flags. 

12. 

After a rest stop, respondent entered A.M.’s bus and eventually sat down 

next to A.M. Respondent asked A.M. if she was doing OK after the prior awards 

ceremony incident, and A.M. assured him that she was doing better. She offered to 

have respondent listen to a song on her phone that she thought would be good for 

their choir to sing. They used separate, but connected earbuds to listen to the music; 

A.M. kept one earbud in her ear, and respondent put the other earbud in his ear. 

13. 

A.M. only started feeling uncomfortable when respondent kept moving 

closer to her until his leg touched hers, prompting A.M. to move her leg away. 

Respondent then started falling asleep, initially attempting to rest his head on her 

shoulder or lap, but A.M. prevented that by moving further away towards the window.

She also took the earbud out of her ear. Eventually, respondent dozed with his head 

on the head rest in front of him. At this point, most of the other students on the bus 

were also asleep, and A.M. could not see any of the chaperones. 

7

14.

After respondent woke up, he noticed that A.M.’s shoes were off and that

she was only wearing socks. Respondent asked if he could hold her foot, and A.M., 

who “didn’t know how to say no,” agreed. Respondent stated that he wanted to guess 

A.M.’s shoe size, touched the sides of her foot, and incorrectly guessed the size. 

Respondent then touched the bottom of A.M.’s foot, commenting that her foot’s arch 

was good for wearing heels. Thereafter, respondent asked A.M. if she painted her 

toenails. When she said “no,” respondent told her she should. Although the bus’s

interior lights were turned off and it was fairly dark inside the bus, street lights 

permitted A.M. to see respondent’s facial expression, which expressed disapproval. 

Respondent offered to teach her some foot exercises, but A.M. declined. A.M. felt very 

uncomfortable, because respondent had been holding or touching her feet for 

approximately 20 minutes at that point. 

15. 

To change the subject, A.M. asked respondent what his Zodiac sign was. 

Respondent answered that he was a Scorpio, and A.M. told him that her boyfriend was 

also a Scorpio. Respondent then asked A.M. what she found attractive about Scorpios. 

A.M. felt that respondent was flirting and instead told him what she hated about 

Scorpios. Thereafter, respondent mentioned that he wanted A.M. to come in before 

and after school, and during breaks, to help him with music for the choir. After she 

agreed, respondent got up and went to sit in the front of the bus.

16. 

A.M. described her interaction with respondent on the bus as “the 

scariest moment of my life.” She did not tell her assigned chaperone about the 

incident before leaving the bus, because her chaperone did not sit near A.M., and A.M. 

did not know her at all. A.M. also did not tell her family about the incident when she 

arrived home that night. 

8

A.M.’S COMPLAINT TO DIVISADERO 

17.

On Monday, May 13, 2019, A.M. discussed the incident with some of her 

school friends. Although she did not want to “make a big deal about it,” her friends 

convinced her that it was sexual harassment and should be reported to the school. 

That day, A.M. filed a complaint. The assistant principal reviewed A.M.’s complaint, 

discussed it with A.M., and requested additional information, which A.M. provided that 

same day. The written complaint is largely consistent with A.M.’s hearing testimony, 

except that A.M. wrote that respondent talked about, and played with, A.M.’s feet for 

“a couple of hours” (as opposed to approximately 20 minutes). The school contacted 

A.M.’s parents, who then learned about the May 11, 2019 incident for the first time.  

18. 

A.M. never returned to choir class, because she associated choir with her 

traumatic experience on May 11, 2019. Additionally, many of the other choir students 

disbelieved her account or blamed her for filing a complaint, noting that respondent 

“was a great choir teacher” and A.M. “should have just kept it to [her]self.” A.M. also 

stopped composing and listening to music for “a long time” following the May 11, 

2019 incident. 

VUSD’S INVESTIGATION

19.  On Monday May 13, 2019, Divisadero referred A.M.’s complaint to Dedi 

Somavia, then a VUSD Human Resources (HR) Administrator and now VUSD’s Assistant 

Superintendent of HR, who testified at hearing. That same day, Ms. Somavia reviewed 

the complaint, directed that respondent be placed on paid administrative leave, and 

began her investigation. 

20. 

As part of her investigation, Ms. Somavia interviewed several students 

that were on the bus. Although no student contradicted A.M.’s complaint, the other 

9

students did not observe anything, because it was dark on the bus, many were 

sleeping, and respondent sat in the aisle seat largely concealing A.M. from view of 

students across the aisle. Additionally, Ms. Somavia was unable to interview A.M., 

because A.M.’s mother wanted to be present and could not make any scheduled 

appointment. 

21.  Ms. Somavia also interviewed respondent in the presence of his union 

representative. Respondent told Ms. Somavia that he sat down next to A.M. on the bus

to check on her after the awards ceremony incident. According to respondent, A.M. 

was generally a good student, but did not seem to have many friends. After confirming 

that A.M. was calmer, respondent accepted A.M.’s invitation to share earbuds and 

listen to music. Respondent was tired, and he “nod[ded] off” or “dozed off listening to 

her music.”  

When respondent woke up, he and A.M. talked about horoscopes, anime, 

costume play, how to get students more involved in choir, the orthotics he obtained 

while on vacation in Mexico, and foot exercises. When Ms. Somavia asked respondent 

about touching A.M.’s foot, he was evasive and stated that he did not remember 

touching it. He also did not remember talking with A.M. about her toes, toenail polish, 

or high heels. Later in the interview, respondent outright denied touching or holding 

A.M.’s foot and stated that he only pointed to it.  

22.  Ms. Somavia never inquired about the existence of video footage from 

the bus. Although some of the school buses have cameras, she deemed obtaining such 

video footage futile because, based on her past experience, it cannot show events 

taking place in individual seats, especially in darkness. 

10 

23. 

At the time of hearing, VUSD had not made a final determination 

following its investigation. Respondent currently remains on paid administrative leave. 

SUSPENSION OF RESPONDENT’S PROBATION 

24. 

The Commission first learned of the May 11, 2019 incident when 

respondent contacted Ms. Oseguera on August 6, 2019, to inquire whether he was 

required to disclose his placement on paid administrative leave on his probation 

quarterly report. When Ms. Oseguera asked respondent if he had touched A.M.’s foot, 

respondent sounded hesitant and stated that he “didn’t think so.” Ms. Oseguera 

informed respondent that he was not required to disclose the incident, because VUSD 

had not yet taken any final action. Nevertheless, she would discuss the matter with her 

supervisor.  

25.

After her conversation with respondent, Ms. Oseguera discussed the 

matter with her supervisor and obtained documents concerning the May 11, 2019 

incident from VUSD. She did not personally interview A.M. or any of the other students 

on the bus. On or about October 9, 2019, respondent’s probation was suspended, 

pending the filing of a petition to revoke probation.  

Petition to Revoke Probation

26.  On March 2, 2020, complainant, in her official capacity, signed and 

thereafter filed a Petition to Revoke Probation. Complainant contends cause exists to 

revoke respondent’s probation and impose the stayed revocation of his credential

pursuant to Probation Condition No. 10, because respondent failed to maintain a 

“hands off” policy with students, in violation of Probation Condition Nos. 2 and 4. 

11 

27. 

Respondent timely filed a Notice of Defense. The matter was set for an 

evidentiary hearing before an ALJ of the OAH, an independent adjudicative agency of 

the State of California, pursuant to Government Code section 11500 et seq.  

Respondent’s Evidence 

28.

Respondent testified at hearing. He obtained his initial teaching 

credential in 2005. He first started teaching at VUSD in August 2015. Since August 

2016, he has been the choir teacher at Divisadero, his main school site, and also 

teaches music at two elementary schools in VUSD.  

29. 

Respondent acknowledged his prior discipline by the Commission. He 

disagrees with Judge DeCure’s findings and decision, subsequently adopted by the 

Commission, and does not feel like he “got a fair shake.” He continues to vehemently 

deny the misconduct underlying his prior discipline, except that he admits having had 

a conversation with an adult teacher regarding his foot fetish. Nevertheless, he has 

learned to be more cognizant of the teaching environment and to “watch my back.” 

Additionally, he appreciated that his credential was not revoked outright. Respondent 

understood, and believes he fully complied with, all his probation terms. 

30. 

At the May 11, 2019 Six Flags awards ceremony, respondent felt bad for 

A.M. when she became upset and explained that the award was for the whole group, 

not any particular student. He had never seen A.M. that upset before and thus asked 

her whether she was on any medication. He also reassured her that she was a good 

student and a valued member of the choir. 

31. 

Respondent admits that he sat down next to A.M. on the bus ride home, 

asked her whether she was doing OK after the award ceremony incident, and she 

assured him she was “doing better.” He also agreed that the bus was relatively dark 

12 

when he sat down next to A.M., because the interior lights had been turned off. 

However, his version of subsequent events significantly differs from A.M.’s version.  

32. 

According to respondent, he and A.M. then talked about various subjects, 

including horoscope signs, anime, costume play, how to get students more involved in 

choir, the approaching summer vacation, the orthotics he obtained while on vacation 

in Mexico, and foot exercises he was required to do. Respondent demonstrated the 

foot exercises, but never asked A.M. to perform them. He never touched A.M.’s foot or 

any other part of her body, never attempted to guess her foot size, and never talked to 

her about painting her toenails. While talking with A.M., respondent also intermittently 

talked with the two students sitting in the same row across the aisle. 

Towards the end of their conversation, A.M. offered respondent an earbud to 

listen to one of the songs on her phone, which she believed would be a good song for 

the choir to learn. Although they shared her earbuds, the earbuds stretched a 

sufficient distance, and he did not have to sit “really close” to her. Respondent listened 

to about three or four songs before he “nodded off” briefly, leaning his head against 

the headrest in front of him. He never put his head on A.M.’s shoulder or lap, and his 

leg never touched hers. 

When respondent realized he was “nodding off,” he got up, because it was “not 

a good situation” to be falling asleep on the bus next to a student. He returned to his 

own seat at the front of the bus, where he remained until they reached their 

destination. Respondent estimated that he sat next to A.M. on the bus for a total of 

approximately 20 to 30 minutes. He has had no further interaction with A.M. since 

then. 

13 

33. 

According to respondent, there was nothing inappropriate about his May 

11, 2019 interaction with A.M. He believes A.M. is lying, possibly because she was 

upset with him over the awards ceremony incident.  

34. 

In December 2019, while on paid administrative leave, respondent 

obtained a master of arts degree. Respondent is passionate about teaching music and 

strongly desires an opportunity to return to teaching.  

Analysis 

35. 

At hearing, respondent challenged the adequacy of VUSD’s investigation, 

because Ms. Somavia never interviewed A.M. or obtained any available video footage 

from the bus’s camera. Additionally, respondent also challenged the Commission’s 

assessment, because Ms. Oseguera never interviewed A.M. or any other witnesses. 

Respondent’s concerns are unfounded, because the court gives no deference to 

ultimate conclusions, if any, reached by Ms. Somavia or Ms. Oseguera. Instead, the 

court independently reviews the record evidence presented at hearing.  

36. 

A.M.’s and respondent’s versions of the May 11, 2019 incident are 

irreconcilable as to whether respondent inappropriately touched A.M. Thus, as a 

threshold matter, it is necessary to determine which version is more credible.  

CREDIBILITY EVALUATION

37. 

It is well-settled that the trier of fact may accept part of the testimony of 

a witness and reject another part even though the latter contradicts the part accepted. 

(

(1973) 9 Cal.3d 51, 67 [citations omitted].) The trier of 

fact may also “reject part of the testimony of a witness, though not directly 

contradicted, and combine the accepted portions with bits of testimony or inferences 

14 

from the testimony of other witnesses thus weaving a cloth of truth out of selected 

material.” (

, at 67-68, quoting from 

(1958) 161 Cal.App.2d 762, 

777.) Moreover, the trier of fact may reject the testimony of a witness, even an expert, 

although not contradicted. (

(1971) 3 Cal.3d 875, 890.) 

The testimony of “one credible witness may constitute substantial evidence.” (

(1986) 189 Cal.App.3d 1040, 1052.) 

38. 

A.M.’s testimony and demeanor at hearing were sincere and convincing, 

and she appeared genuinely traumatized by the May 11, 2019 incident. (Evid. Code, § 

780, subd. (a).) Her hearing testimony was also largely consistent with the written 

complaint she submitted to VUSD (

, sub. (g)), except for her statement in the 

complaint that respondent talked about, and played with, A.M.’s feet for “a couple of 

hours.” Although unlikely that the incident lasted hours, it is entirely plausible that it 

felt like hours to a 13-year-old student effectively trapped on a dark bus next to an 

authority figure. 

Moreover, A.M. had no plausible reason to invent her account of inappropriate 

touching. (Evid. Code, § 780, subd. (f).) She did not know about respondent’s 

disciplinary history and probationary status. Although she may have been initially 

upset with respondent about the awards ceremony incident, all parties agree that A.M. 

had calmed down and was doing better on the return bus journey, even inviting 

respondent to listen to music on her phone. That A.M. continued to harbor serious 

anger and thus contrived a detailed account of respondent inappropriately touching 

her foot, without any prior knowledge of respondent’s foot fetish, strains credulity.

Contrary to respondent’s argument, A.M.’s failure to immediately inform her 

parents regarding the May 11, 2019 incident does not necessarily undermine her 

credibility. A.M. explained that she initially did not want to “make a big deal about it,” 

15 

but that her friends later convinced her that the incident was serious enough to report 

to the school. Such behavior is not incompatible with the shock and embarrassment a 

young, middle-school student may have experienced given the nature of the incident. 

39. 

By contrast, respondent’s testimony and demeanor at hearing were

guarded and defensive. (Evid. Code, § 780, subd. (a).) Although he unequivocally

denied touching A.M.’s foot or any other body part, his prior denials to Ms. Somavia 

and Ms. Oseguera were hesitant, equivocal, and evasive, at times stating that he 

“didn’t think so” or did not remember. (

, subd. (h).) Additionally, respondent’s 

testimony concerning the chronology of events on the bus differed from the previous

account he provided to Ms. Somavia. Moreover, given his probation, which included a 

specific requirement to maintain a “hands off” policy with students, respondent had a 

significant personal interest in denying A.M.’s allegations of inappropriate touching. 

(

, subd. (f).)1

40. 

In sum, based on the record as a whole, A.M.’s version of the May 11, 

2019 incident is more credible than respondent’s version. In light of that credibility 

determination, the court proceeds to analyze whether cause exists to revoke 

respondent’s probation.  

 

1 Although respondent’s prior instances of inappropriately touching students 

were considered in determining the appropriate degree of discipline, as discussed 

below, they were not considered in assessing respondent’s credibility concerning the 

May 11, 2019 incident giving rise to the Petition to Revoke Probation.  

16 

CAUSE TO REVOKE PROBATION 

41.

Probation Condition No. 2 required respondent to comply with all terms 

and conditions of his probation. Additionally, Probation Condition No. 4 required 

respondent to maintain a strict “hands off” policy, refraining from making physical 

contact with students except in the event of a medical or student-safety emergency.

Finally, Probation Condition No. 10 permits the Commission to set aside the stayed 

revocation order and revoke respondent’s credential if he violates any probation 

condition during the term of probation. 

42.

Given the foregoing, complainant established that respondent violated 

Probation Condition Nos. 2 and 4 by inappropriately touching A.M. on May 11, 2019, 

and that such touching did not occur in the context of a medical or student-safety 

emergency. Thus, cause exists to set aside the stayed revocation order and revoke 

respondent’s credential pursuant to Probation Condition No. 10 of the Commission’s 

October 5, 2018 decision.  

APPROPRIATE DISCIPLINE

43.

Complainant also persuasively argued that revocation of respondent’s 

credential is the appropriate discipline when the 

factors are considered. 

Those factors are: (1) the likelihood that the conduct may have adversely affected 

students, fellow teachers, or the educational community, and the degree of such 

adversity anticipated; (2) the proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct; (3) the 

type of credential held or applied for by the person involved; (4) the extenuating or 

aggravating circumstances surrounding the conduct; (5) the praiseworthiness or 

blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the conduct; (6) the likelihood of the 

recurrence of the questioned conduct; (7) the extent to which disciplinary action may 

17 

inflict an adverse impact or chilling effect upon the constitutional rights of the person 

involved, or other certified persons; and (8) the publicity or notoriety given to the 

conduct. (

, supra, 1 Cal.3d at p. 229; Cal. Code Regs, tit. 5, § 80302.) Each 

factor is addressed below.  

Adverse Effect

44. 

Respondent’s conduct harmed A.M., because she was traumatized and 

dropped out of choir classes. Additionally, she stopped composing and listening to 

music for an extended period of time. Furthermore, the Divisadero school community 

was harmed, because respondent has now been on paid administrative leave for 

almost two years without providing any educational benefit to Divisadero. 

Proximity or Remoteness in Time of Respondent’s Conduct 

45. 

Respondent’s May 2019 conduct is still relatively recent. Additionally, any 

lapse in time since then is irrelevant, because respondent has been on paid 

administrative leave without access to any students during that period. 

Type of Credential Held 

46. 

Respondent’s credential permits him to teach Music and English. Music 

instruction inherently provides an opportunity for close interaction with students, 

including potential inappropriate touching. Thus, respondent’s credential involves a 

higher degree of risk.  

Extenuating or Aggravating Circumstances 

47. 

There are no extenuating circumstances. In terms of aggravating 

circumstances, respondent has been cautioned and reprimanded on numerous prior 

18 

occasions regarding his inappropriate touching of students. On October 5, 2018, he 

was formally disciplined and placed on probation by the Commission for placing his 

hands on a student. The May 11, 2019 incident involving A.M. is just the latest in a 

continued pattern of misconduct involving inappropriate touching of students. To 

date, respondent fails to accept any responsibility for his misconduct, casting himself 

as a passive victim of lying students, vindictive colleagues and administrators, and 

judges who refuse to give him a “fair shake.” 

Praiseworthiness or Blameworthiness of Respondent’s 

Motives 

48. 

Respondent’s subjective motives for physically touching students are 

unknown. Even assuming, without deciding, that respondent harbors no depraved or 

other malicious intent, his continued pattern of inappropriately touching students is 

unacceptable and cannot be tolerated. 

Likelihood of Recurrence  

49.  Of all the 

factors, the likelihood of recurrence of respondent’s 

conduct most heavily favors revocation here. After numerous cautions and reprimands, 

which failed to curb respondent’s misconduct, the Commission placed respondent on 

probation with a strong admonition to maintain a strict “hands off” policy with 

students. Nevertheless, just over six months into his probation period, respondent 

inappropriately touched A.M. Thus, respondent’s track record strongly suggests that 

he is unable to control his behavior, even under the strictures of probation.  

19 

Any Adverse Impact or Chilling Effect On Constitutional 

Rights 

50.

This factor is inapplicable. Respondent’s conduct does not involve 

protected speech, protected conduct, or any other Constitutional rights. 

Publicity or Notoriety Given to Respondent’s Conduct 

51. 

There was no evidence that the May 11, 2019 incident garnered any 

publicity or notoriety in the community at large. However, A.M. credibly testified that 

other choir students learned of her complaint and some treated her adversely for filing 

the complaint.

Summary  

52. 

After carefully considering the 

 factors and the record as a 

whole, the court concludes that respondent is unfit to teach. Moreover, the 

Commission cannot be adequately assured that respondent will comply with the terms 

of his probation if it were reinstated and/or extended. Respondent’s continued pattern 

of misconduct strongly suggests that he will again inappropriately touch students if 

permitted to keep his credential, even with probationary conditions. Thus, revocation 

of respondent’s credential is necessary to protect public health, safety, and welfare. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Complainant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the

evidence that cause exists to revoke respondent’s probation. (

 (2012) 209 Cal.App.4th 445, 454 

20 

[“While the board is required to prove the allegations in an accusation by clear and 

convincing evidence, it is only required to prove the allegations in a petition to revoke 

probation by a preponderance of the evidence.”].) A preponderance of the evidence 

means “evidence that has more convincing force than that opposed to it.” (

(2009) 171 Cal.App.4th 1549, 1567.)

2. 

Based on the Factual Findings as a whole, and specifically, Factual 

Findings 35 through 42, respondent violated Probation Condition Nos. 2 and 4 by 

failing to maintain a “hands off” policy with A.M. Therefore, cause exists to set aside 

the stay order and impose the stayed discipline of revocation of respondent’s 

credential pursuant to Condition No. 10 of the Commission’s October 5, 2018 decision. 

3. 

Based on the Factual Findings as a whole, and specifically, Factual 

Findings 43 through 52, respondent is unfit to teach, and revocation of his credential is 

necessary to protect public health, safety, and welfare. 

The Petition to Revoke Probation against respondent John Hilliard Singh is 

GRANTED. The Clear Single Subject Teaching Credential with Music and English 

authorizations issued to respondent is REVOKED. 

DATE: February 12, 2021 

WIM VAN ROOYEN 

Administrative Law Judge

Office of Administrative Hearings

ORDER 

21 

