BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Accusation Against: 

CHRISTOPHER MICHAEL TAYLOR, Respondent 

Agency Case No. 1-881234846 

OAH No. 2020080182 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Dena Coggins, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings 

(OAH), State of California, heard this matter by video conference on January 19, 2021.

Brent O. Jex, Deputy Attorney General, represented complainant Mary Vixie 

Sandy Ed.D, Executive Director of the California Commission on Teacher Credentialing 

(Commission). 

Taylor. 

Joshua F. Richtel, Attorney at Law, represented respondent Christopher Michael 

Oral and documentary evidence was received. The record remained open to 

allow respondent an opportunity to submit audio and video recordings that were 

presented during the hearing. Issues relating to admissibility of the recordings were 

resolved at the hearing. The record was closed and the matter was submitted for 

decision on January 22, 2021.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

Procedural Background 

1.

On April 1, 2014, the Commission issued a Clear Single Subject Teaching 

Credential (Credential) to respondent, authorizing him to teach math in grades twelve 

and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults. The 

Credential was in full force and effect at all times relevant to the matter. The Credential 

will expire on April 1, 2024, unless renewed or revoked. 

2. 

On March 2, 2020, complainant, acting in her official capacity, signed and 

subsequently filed an Accusation in this matter. The Accusation seeks to revoke all 

credentials, certificates, and authorizations issued to respondent, or take other 

appropriate adverse action against respondent based on his alleged unprofessional 

conduct, evident unfitness for service, immoral conduct, and acts of moral turpitude

relating to an incident that occurred on June, 2, 2018. 

3. 

Respondent timely filed a Notice of Defense. The matter was set for an 

evidentiary hearing before an Administrative Law Judge of the OAH, an independent 

adjudicative agency of the State of California, pursuant to Government Code section 

11500 et seq.

June 2, 2018 Incident 

4. 

Respondent has been a math teacher at Edison High School (Edison) in 

Fresno, California, since August 2014. Edison is a high school in the Fresno Unified 

School District (District). In June 2018, respondent was a basketball coach for Splash 

City Elite (SCE), a high school level summer league basketball team. Respondent’s 

minor son was a player on SCE. 

2

5.

On June 2, 2018, SCE played in a basketball tournament at Bullard High 

School, another high school in the District; the game was not a school-sponsored 

event. At the tournament, SCE played team Evolution. N

 S

, 1 a 16-year 

old high school student, was an Evolution basketball player. Mr. S

 was not a 

student at Edison. 

6. 

An intense game between SCE and Evolution was played at the 

tournament; SCE ultimately lost the game. Tensions were high following the game and 

Mr. S

and respondent began taunting one another about the game.  

7. 

Sometime after the game, but before the start of the next game, 

respondent got up to use the bathroom. As he did, he walked past Mr. S

 and 

Mr. S

challenged respondent to a fight by saying they could “take it outside.” 

Respondent then returned the challenge by stating that they could “take it to the 

bathroom.” Respondent continued walking to the bathroom and Mr. S

 

subsequently followed him. Respondent entered the bathroom first. Before entering 

the bathroom behind respondent, respondent’s son ran behind Mr. S

 and 

punched Mr. S

 in the back of the head. Mr. S

 and respondent’s son 

then entered the bathroom. The facts of what occurred in the bathroom are in dispute. 

As discussed more fully below, the only two individuals that testified about what 

occurred in the bathroom were respondent and Patrick Porfiri. 

8. 

Shortly after entering the bathroom, Mr. S

 was pulled from the 

bathroom by others. Upon exiting the bathroom, respondent’s wife hit Mr. S

 

 

evidence. 

1 Mr. S

 was also referred to as N

 R

 in the documentary 

3

on the back of the head with a metal drinking cup. Shortly thereafter he exited the 

gymnasium. Respondent and his family then left the school. Mr. S

 was taken 

to the emergency room of a nearby hospital by ambulance. At the emergency room, 

Mr. S

 complained of a mild headache and left hip pain; his vitals were normal. 

The emergency room doctor diagnosed him with a mild concussion. 

9. 

Respondent was subsequently arrested. The criminal case was later 

dismissed with prejudice by the Fresno Superior Court in March 2019.  

Commission’s Evidence

TESTIMONY OF PATRICK PORFIRI 

10.  Mr. Porfiri testified at the hearing. He was the Commission’s sole witness 

at hearing. Mr. Porfiri has known Mr. S

 for three years; Mr. Porfiri’s girlfriend is 

Mr. S

’s sister. Mr. Porfiri describes Mr. S

 as “like a brother” to him. Mr. 

Porfiri had never met respondent prior to the June 2, 2018 game. Mr. Porfiri was an 

adult at the time of the incident.

11. Mr. Porfiri testified about what he recalled occurring in the gymnasium 

and in the bathroom. Mr. Porfiri arrived at the game after he finished work. The game 

had already started and was in the third quarter when he arrived. During his testimony, 

he mistakenly recalled that the game occurred at Buchanan High School.

12. Mr. Porfiri sat behind the table where the game buzzers were located. Mr. 

Porfiri noticed SCE players and coaches becoming agitated and upset regarding calls 

that were made by the game referees during the game. He did not observe Mr. 

S

 having any interactions with the SCE coaches during the game.

4

13. Mr. Porfiri testified he overheard banter between respondent and Mr. 

S

S

 following the game. As respondent walked by Mr. S

, he heard Mr. 

say, “we can take this outside.” Then heard respondent say, “or we can take 

this into the bathroom.”  

Mr. Porfiri also testified that he saw Mr. S

 follow respondent into the 

bathroom and saw respondent pull Mr. S

 into the bathroom. He initially 

testified he did not observe respondent’s son punch respondent in the back of the 

head prior to Mr. S

 entering the bathroom. He later testified that he did see 

respondent’s son punch Mr. S

 in the head before they all entered the 

bathroom. Mr. Porfiri along with other basketball players ran in the direction of the 

bathroom. Despite numerous people blocking the door of the bathroom, Mr. Porfiri, 

purportedly because he was so much shorter than the basketball players, was able to 

maneuver around them and see what was occurring inside the bathroom. Mr. Porfiri 

estimated he was able to get two feet into the bathroom. When he entered, there were 

three other basketball players in the bathroom along with respondent and Mr. 

S

. He saw respondent holding Mr. S

 by the throat and pinning him 

against the wall with his arm. Respondent had his right knee on Mr. S

’s thigh. 

He then saw respondent punch Mr. S

 in the torso. The other basketball 

players in the bathroom were trying to break up the fight. He did not mention seeing 

anyone else hit Mr. S

 in the bathroom. Mr. Porfiri pulled respondent out of 

the bathroom then witnessed respondent’s wife hit Mr. S

 on the head with a 

metal drinking cup. He estimated he was in the bathroom for four minutes. 

14. 

Following the incident, Mr. Porfiri testified that Mr. S

 was 

“shaken up” and “not making sense.” He also thought Mr. S

 seemed angry 

and confused. He observed Mr. S

 leave the gymnasium by ambulance. 

5

15.

On June 7, 2018, Mr. Porfiri gave a statement to law enforcement, who 

provided Mr. Porfiri with a photo lineup, which included a photo of respondent. Mr. 

Porfiri did not select respondent in the lineup. Mr. Porfiri told law enforcement that it 

was respondent who first challenged Mr. S

 to “settle this outside” not Mr. 

S

.  

16.  Mr. Porfiri later submitted a statement to the Commission, dated June 14, 

2019. In his statement, he wrote the following, in part, about the June 2, 2018 incident:  

[T]he last of their banter ended when Mr. S

 and 

[respondent] were or about a couple feet from each other 

and [respondent] had pulled [Mr. S

] into the 

bathroom entrance and as I watched I rushed into the 

bathroom and after getting through the first three 

basketball members from [respondent’s] team into the 

bathroom and had pushed them away after they had got a 

hit onto [Mr. S

]. I saw [respondent] holding [Mr. 

S

S

S

] by his neck and [respondent] had punched [Mr. 

] once in torso, knee pressed up under [Mr. 

’s] thigh, suffocating [Mr. S

]. Once more 

people had jumped in I was able to pull [Mr. S

] out 

and started pushing him towards the door when right when 

we got to the door I saw [Mr. S

] get hit with a 

metal cup. . . . 

6

RESPONDENT’S PRIOR CONVICTIONS AND COURT MARTIAL

17.

In the Accusation, complainant alleged that additional incidents involving 

respondent should be considered for disciplinary purposes. Specifically, complainant

asserts respondent’s two criminal convictions and an incident wherein respondent was 

court martialed should be considered.  

18.  On April 2, 2007, in the Kings County Superior Court, Case No. 

07CM0734, respondent, on his plea of nolo contendre, was convicted of violating 

Vehicle Code section 23103.5, reckless driving involving alcohol, a misdemeanor. The 

court suspended imposition of sentence and placed respondent on three years’ 

probation. The court ordered respondent to serve one day in county jail, enroll and 

complete a driving under the influence program, and pay fines and fees in the amount 

of $749. 

19.  On February 4, 1997, in the Kings County Superior Court, Case No. 

L965930, respondent, on his plea of no contest, was convicted of violating Penal Code 

section 242, battery against his spouse, a misdemeanor. The Court placed respondent 

on three years’ probation and ordered him to pay $500 in court fines and fees. 

20. 

Respondent submitted a statement to the Commission in 2009, wherein 

he explained the following: 

In 1991, while serving in the United States Air Force, some 

friends and I had a party with some girls in my dormitory 

room. . . . Alcohol became involved and the mood switched 

from rated G to rated R really fast. This switch led me to 

being convicted by the [United States Air Force] in a 1992 

Special Court Martial Hearing: Indecent acts with another 

7

and disobeying an order. I was sentenced to three months 

confinement, rank reduction, and pay withholdings. 

The indecent acts involved two 16-year old females. 

21. 

Respondent does not deny the convictions or being court martialed, all 

of which the Commission was aware of prior to the issuance of his Credential.  

Respondent’s Evidence 

RESPONDENT’S TESTIMONY 

22. 

Respondent’s Credential has not been previously disciplined. He was not 

disciplined by the District relating to the events that occurred on June 2, 2018.  

23. 

Regarding the June 2, 2018 incident, respondent recalled there being a 

highly contested basketball game. After the game, he prepared his team to shake 

hands with the opposing team. During the hand shake, he recalled Mr. S

 

telling respondent he needed to learn to respect Mr. S

. Respondent then 

began to “banter” with Mr. S

; respondent verbally “discredited” Mr. 

S

’s basketball skills. For example, he admitted telling Mr. S

 his 

“basketball game sucked” and that he was not “that good” at basketball. 

24.

Respondent began getting his team ready for the next game and realized 

he needed to use the bathroom. Mr. S

 told respondent they could “finish this 

outside” and respondent, without “thinking” or “using [his] best judgment” responded 

that they did not have to wait to go outside, they could go to the bathroom instead.

Respondent, however, denied that his comment implied he was going to have a 

physical altercation with Mr. S

 or was inviting a fight. Respondent denied 

getting into a physical altercation with Mr. S

 in the bathroom; the only 

8

physical combatants were Mr. S

 and respondent’s son who fought in the 

bathroom before Mr. S

 was pulled out. Respondent denied ever touching Mr. 

S

. 

25. 

Following the incident, respondent learned that as an educator you have 

to learn to take into account other people’s perspectives and characteristics. He did 

not previously take into account that his words might make another person upset. He 

acknowledged that he should have spoken to Mr. S

 in a more positive tone. 

Respondent no longer coaches basketball. He completed an anger management class 

in fall 2018, and he was able to explain at the hearing what he learned in the class. 

VIDEO OF INCIDENT 

26. 

Respondent submitted a video capturing one minute of the incident. The 

video depicts numerous individuals surrounding the front of the bathroom in the gym 

and pushing towards the open bathroom door. Mr. Porfiri is visible several times on 

the video; he is seen pushing through the crowd but never being inside of the 

bathroom. Also, Mr. S

 is seen being pulled away from the bathroom and 

pushed out of the gym. Although Mr. Porfiri does push Mr. S

 towards the 

door leading outside of the gym once Mr. S

 is out of the bathroom, Mr. Porfiri 

is not seen inside of the bathroom pulling Mr. S

.

TESTIMONY OF MARIA MAZZONI 

27.  Maria Mazzoni, Administrator with the District’s Human Resources 

Department, testified at the hearing. Ms. Mazzoni has been employed by the District 

for 32 years, and has been in her current position for 13 years. She previously taught 

for 11 years. Her duties include investigating alleged misconduct of certificated staff. 

Once the District was notified of respondent’s arrest, he was placed on administrative 

9

leave. She was tasked with investigating the incident. She reviewed video surveillance 

of the incident recorded by security cameras in the gym, but she subsequently 

“misplaced” the recording and it was not made available at hearing. She did not see 

respondent being aggressive toward Mr. S

 in the video and found Mr. 

S

 to be the aggressor. However, she acknowledged that the security camera 

was located “far away” from where the incident occurred. Following her investigation, 

which included viewing the video surveillance and interviewing respondent and one 

Edison student, the District returned respondent to work prior to the resolution of the 

criminal matter.  

TESTIMONY OF JOSE MUNOZ 

28. 

Jose Munoz, Principal of Edison, testified at the hearing. He has been in 

his current position for over three years, and was the Vice Principal of Edison for over 

seven years. Mr. Munoz opined that a revocation of respondent’s Credential would be 

a “travesty to education in general.” He described respondent as relatable, going 

above and beyond, and frequently volunteering to provide supplemental education to 

students. He has not observed respondent being aggressive or inappropriate with 

students, and he has never witnessed respondent in a confrontation with students. He 

stated that respondent has a “fine ability to create a positive learning environment” for 

his students. He described respondent as a “role model” for students. He found 

respondent to be forthcoming when discussing the June 2, 2018 incident. 

29. Mr. Munoz wrote a support letter that was submitted at hearing. In the 

letter, Mr. Munoz wrote that respondent is “professional, motivational, and is a 

proficient math teacher.” He further wrote that respondent “spends countless hours 

planning learning experiences that make mathematics understandable for all students” 

and “possess the ability to relate to all types of students with diverse backgrounds as 

10 

he uses his interpersonal skills to build relationships with students, teachers and 

administrators.” He further described respondent as a “dedicated educator [who] 

impacts his students in a positive manner on a daily basis.”  

LETTERS OF SUPPORT AND PERFORMANCE EVALUATION 

30.

In addition to Mr. Munoz’s letter, respondent submitted eight letters of 

support from coworkers, his pastor, students’ parents, and students. Seven of the 

letters were written in 2018; one letter is undated. The letters were written in 

connection with the criminal matter relating to the June 2, 2018 incident. The letter 

writers described respondent as being “fair,” “having integrity,” ”caring,” “an asset to 

Edison High School and the teaching community as a whole,” and “a great teacher.” 

His students commented, “he had confidence in me, even when I doubted myself,” and 

“he emphasized the importance of working hard, getting good grades, being 

respectable, having a good attitude, and going to college.”

31. 

In respondent’s most recent Summative Evaluation Ratings based upon 

an assessment on May 8, 2018, respondent met or demonstrated expertise in all 

measured standards. Respondent received a rating of “demonstrates expertise” in 

Standard 2, creating and maintaining effective environments for student learning, and 

Standard 3, understanding and organizing subject matter for student learning. 

Morrison Factors 

32. 

In 

(1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, the California 

Supreme Court concluded that a teaching credential cannot be disciplined for immoral 

conduct, unprofessional conduct, or conduct involving moral turpitude “unless that 

conduct indicates that the [educator] is unfit to teach.” (

. at p. 229.) The Court 

outlined factors for consideration when determining whether an educator’s conduct 

11 

demonstrates his unfitness to teach (

), and the Commission adopted those factors 

by enacting California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80302. 

LIKELIHOOD OF ADVERSE EFFECT ON STUDENTS OR FELLOW TEACHERS 

33. 

Respondent has a teaching credential that permits him to teach a wide 

array of students from diverse backgrounds. Teachers are expected to be role models 

and to be positive and uplifting to students. Here, respondent admitted taunting a 

high school student following a basketball game and calling into question the 

student’s basketball skills. The evidence established that respondent eventually 

challenged Mr. S

 to a fight. As discussed more fully below, although the 

evidence was not sufficient to establish that respondent assaulted Mr. S

 in the 

bathroom, the incident led to Mr. S

 being transported to an emergency room 

by ambulance and suffering a mild concussion. There is no question that Mr. S

 

was affected by respondent’s words based upon his decision to follow respondent into 

the bathroom. It was clear that respondent’s words and failure to act as a role model 

in an intense basketball game involving students adversely affected not only Mr. 

S

, who was injured, but all those who attended the basketball game.  

PROXIMITY OR REMOTENESS IN TIME OF THE CONDUCT

34. 

The incident at issue took place only two years ago, in 2018. The conduct 

at issue is not remote in time. 

CREDENTIAL HELD

experience. 

12 

35. 

Respondent is a single-subject credentialed teacher with over six years of 

EXTENUATING OR AGGRAVATING CIRCUMSTANCES

36.

Neither the Education Code nor the regulations adopted by the 

Commission specify what constitutes “extenuating circumstances.” However, California 

Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80300, subdivision (m), defines “mitigating factor” 

as “an event or circumstance which demonstrates that the public, schoolchildren and 

the profession would be adequately protected by a more lenient degree of adverse 

action or no adverse action whatsoever.”

37.  Mr. Munoz testified credibly about the contributions respondent makes 

to the student community at Edison. There was no evidence to show that respondent 

has acted aggressively or been confrontational with his students at Edison. To the 

contrary, he appears likeable and dedicated to his student’s mathematical education. 

The evidence did not establish that respondent has engaged in other questionable 

behavior as a teacher. Respondent recognizes his wrongdoing and showed remorse at 

the hearing. There is no prior record of adverse action over respondent’s years of 

educational service. These facts provide support that the public, students, and the 

profession would be adequately protected by a more lenient degree of adverse action 

against respondent’s Credential. 

38. 

The Commission’s regulations also define “aggravating factor.” California 

Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80300, subdivision (b), defines that term as “an 

event or circumstance which demonstrates that a greater degree of adverse action for 

an act of professional misconduct is needed to adequately protect the public, 

schoolchildren or the profession.” The aggravating factors alleged by complainant 

include that his conduct significantly harmed a child trusted to his care; significantly 

harmed the public or educational system; was surrounded by bad faith, dishonesty or 

13 

other violation of the laws governing educators; and he had prior notice, warning or 

reprimands for similar conduct. These factors were considered.  

39. 

As additional factors for disciplinary consideration, the evidence 

established that respondent received a 2007 conviction for reckless driving, 1997 

conviction for battery, and was court martialed in 1992 for indecent acts. Respondent’s 

acts underlying these convictions and incidents are undoubtedly concerning. However, 

they occurred between 13 and 28 years ago, and there is no evidence respondent has 

received any other criminal convictions since that time. 

PRAISEWORTHINESS OR BLAMEWORTHINESS OF MOTIVES RESULTING IN THE 

MISCONDUCT 

40. 

Respondent’s conduct at the June 2, 2018 basketball game was not 

praiseworthy. Respondent was to blame for not deescalating the situation. As a 

credentialed teacher and an adult, he should not have participated in the taunting and 

banter with a high school student and should have walked away. Instead, he 

challenged the student to a fight and attempted to demoralize the student.

LIKELIHOOD OF RECURRENCE 

41. 

As discussed above, there was no evidence that respondent has been 

aggressive or involved in confrontation with any other students or that he has any 

other criminal convictions. Additionally, respondent showed an appropriate level of 

remorse for his conduct at the June 2, 2018 incident. Accordingly, the likelihood of 

recurrence of his misconduct appears minimal.  

14 

EXTENT TO WHICH DISCIPLINARY ACTION MAY INFLICT AN ADVERSE IMPACT 

OR CHILLING EFFECT UPON CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS OF PERSON INVOLVED 

OR OTHER CERTIFIED PERSONS

42.  No evidence was presented to indicate the disciplinary action may inflict 

an adverse impact or chilling effect upon the constitutional rights of person involved 

or other certified persons. 

PUBLICITY OR NOTORIETY OF MISCONDUCT 

43.  No evidence was presented to indicate the notoriety or publicity 

accorded to respondent’s misconduct.  

Analysis 

44. 

The evidence established that while coaching a summer league high 

school basketball game, respondent became involved in taunting a high school player 

on the opposing team. Respondent admitted to speaking negatively to Mr. S

, 

and when challenged to go outside to settle the issue by Mr. S

, respondent 

responded to the challenge by inviting Mr. S

 to the bathroom. Although 

respondent denies that he was challenging him to a fight, the only reasonable 

explanation for his invitation was that he was not backing down from Mr. S

’s 

challenge. As a credentialed teacher and adult, respondent should not have 

participated in a verbal altercation with a high school student nor challenged him to a 

fight. Respondent’s conduct calls into serious question his judgment as an educator. 

45.  However, the evidence did not establish that respondent assaulted or 

fought Mr. S

 at the June 2, 2018 basketball game. Respondent adamantly 

denied touching Mr. S

 in the bathroom. The only witness that testified that 

15 

respondent choked and punched Mr. S

 was Mr. Porfiri. Mr. Porfiri’s testimony 

was not persuasive. During his testimony, he was inconsistent about that events he 

witnessed, including whether or not respondent’s son punched Mr. S

 in the 

head. Additionally, his recollection of the events that occurred at the basketball game 

was inconsistent over time and not corroborated by the short video of the incident 

submitted in evidence. The video showed Mr. Porfiri was not two feet in the bathroom 

or in the bathroom at all. The video also did not show Mr. Porfiri pulling Mr. S

 

out of the bathroom. During his hearing testimony, he did not mention that he saw 

anyone hit Mr. S

 other than respondent and respondent’s son, but in his 

statement submitted to the Commission, he stated that he pushed three basketball 

players from respondent’s team after they got “a hit onto [Mr. S

].” Also, based 

upon the evidence, it was unlikely the bathroom incident occurred for four minutes as 

Mr. Porfiri testified. Mr. Porfiri’s testimony did not have the credibility necessary to 

establish what occurred in the bathroom. 

46.  Nonetheless, the evidence established respondent engaged in 

unprofessional conduct on June 2, 2018. The evidence did not establish that 

respondent engaged in conduct that was hostile to the welfare of the general public 

and contrary to good morals or that he is clearly not fit, not adapted to or unsuitable 

for teaching, or possessed of temperamental defects or inadequacies. When all of the 

evidence is weighed and considered, respondent’s actions on June 2, 2018, support 

disciplining his Credential. However, respondent took full responsibility for his 

misconduct and showed sufficient remorse and insight to demonstrate substantial 

rehabilitation. Based on the evidence as a whole, it is consistent with the public safety 

to allow him to maintain his Credential on a probationary basis. 

16 

7.

The Commission may discipline a credential for immoral conduct. (Ed. 

Code, § 44421.) However, as set forth in Factual Findings 32 through 46, the clear and 

convincing evidence did not establish respondent engaged in immoral conduct 

indicating an unfitness to teach. Therefore, cause does not exist to discipline each of 

his Credential pursuant to Education Code section 44421. 

8. 

The Commission may discipline a credential for evident unfitness for 

service. (Ed. Code, § 44421.) However, as set forth in Factual Findings 32 through 46, 

the evidence did not establish respondent is clearly not fit, not adapted to or 

unsuitable for teaching, or possessed of temperamental defects or inadequacies, as 

respondent’s misconduct stemmed from one incident, which showed respondent 

exercised poor judgment, but appeared to be out of character for respondent. 

Therefore, cause does not exist to discipline his Credential pursuant to Education Code 

section 44421 for evident unfitness for service. 

9. 

Although cause for discipline exists to discipline respondent’s Credential, 

respondent provided sufficient evidence of rehabilitation to permit him to maintain his 

Credential on a probationary basis.  

The Clear Single Subject Teaching Credential issued to respondent Christopher 

Michael Taylor is revoked, the revocation is stayed, and respondent is placed on 

probation for three (3) years, subject to terms 1-11 below.

1. 

Severability Clause. Each condition of probation contained herein is a 

separate and distinct condition. If any condition of this Order, or any application 

thereof, is declared unenforceable in whole, in part, or to any extent, the remainder of 

ORDER

19 

this Order, and all other applications thereof, shall not be affected. Each condition of 

this Order shall separately be valid and enforceable to the fullest extent permitted by 

law.  

violation. 

2. 

Notification of Current Mailing Address, Email Address and 

Telephone Number. Respondent shall notify the monitor of his current mailing 

address, email address, and telephone number where voicemail or text message may 

be left. Respondent shall notify the monitor, in writing, within 72 hours, of any change 

of mailing address, email address, or telephone number. Failure to notify the monitor 

within the specified time period stated above shall be considered a probation 

3. 

Submit Written Reports. Respondent shall report to the Commission 

quarterly, on a schedule designated by the Commission or the monitor. Reports shall 

be made either in person or in writing, as directed. Among other requirements as 

determined by the Commission, respondent shall state in each report under penalty of 

perjury whether he has complied with all the terms and conditions of probation. 

Failure to submit timely reports as directed shall be considered a probation violation.  

4. 

Obey All Law. Respondent shall obey all federal, state and local laws, 

including all provisions of the California Education Code. To permit monitoring of 

compliance with this condition, respondent shall submit completed fingerprint forms 

and fingerprint fees within 30 days of the effective date of the decision, unless 

previously submitted as part of the teaching credential application process as 

determined by the monitor. Failure to comply with these provisions shall be 

considered a probation violation. 

20 

5.

Criminal Court Orders. If respondent is under criminal court orders, 

including probation or parole, he shall comply with all terms and conditions of such 

orders. Respondent shall report any alleged violation of a court order to his monitor 

within 72 hours of receipt of notice alleging such violation. Failure to comply with 

these provisions shall be considered a probation violation.  

6. 

Report Any Arrest or Citation. Respondent shall submit to the monitor 

a full and detailed written account of any and all arrests and citations for any violation 

of law in California or any other state (except minor traffic offenses) within three 

business days of the arrest or citation. Failure to notify the monitor within the specified 

time period stated above shall be considered a probation violation. 

7. 

Employment Reporting Requirements. If respondent is currently 

employed in a position that requires him to have a California teaching credential, 

respondent shall provide a copy of this Decision and Accusation to his employer (as 

defined in California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80300) and immediate 

supervisor within five days after its effective date. If, during the probation period, 

respondent obtains new employment that requires him to have a California teaching 

credential, respondent shall provide a copy of this Decision and Accusation to his 

employer and immediate supervisor before commencing work. Failure to comply with 

these provisions shall be considered a probation violation.  

8. 

Maintenance of Active Credential. Respondent shall at all times 

maintain an active, current credential with the Commission, including during any 

period of suspension. Failure to do so shall be considered a probation violation. 

9. 

Compliance with All Terms of Probation. Respondent shall fully 

comply with all terms and conditions of this Decision and cooperate with the 

21 

Commission and his assigned probation compliance monitor in the monitoring and 

investigation of respondent’s compliance with probation terms. Respondent shall 

participate in a telephone or in-person review of the probation terms with 

respondent’s assigned monitor. Respondent must participate in such review within 14 

calendar days after written request is mailed by the monitor. Failure to participate in 

the review of probation terms within the time stated above shall be considered a 

probation violation. 

Respondent shall also respond to all requests made by the monitor by 

responding to written requests sent by mail within 14 calendar days of the request, 

and within two business days after a telephone message or email request, unless a 

different time period is otherwise stated in this Order. Failure to respond within the 

time specified shall be considered a probation violation. 

10. 

Violation of Probation. If respondent violates any term or condition of 

probation, the Commission may refer the matter to the Attorney General’s Office to 

file a Petition to Revoke Probation, and after giving respondent notice and opportunity 

to be heard, may set aside the stay order and impose the stayed discipline. If during 

the period of probation, a Petition to Revoke Probation has been filed against 

respondent’s Credential, or the Attorney General’s Office has been asked to prepare a 

Petition to Revoke Probation against respondent’s Credential, the probationary period 

shall automatically be extended and shall not expire until final action is taken on the 

Petition by the Commission. 

// 

// 

22 

11.

Completion of Probation. Upon successful completion of probation, 

respondent’s Credential shall be fully restored. 

DATE: February 22, 2021

 

DENA COGGINS 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings 

 

 

23 

