BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Accusation and Statement of Issues 

Against: 

ALEJANDRO SANCHEZ MORALES, Respondent 

Case No. 2-12815141 

OAH No. 2020090735 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Marcie Larson, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings 

(OAH), State of California, heard this matter telephonically and by video conference on 

January 26 through 28, 2021, and September 1, 2021, from Sacramento, California. 

Jeffrey Phillips, Deputy Attorney General, represented complainant Mary Vixie 

Sandy, Ed.D., Executive Director of the Commission on Teacher Credentialing 

(Commission), State of California. 

Respondent Alejandro Sanchez Morales represented himself at the hearing. 

Evidence was received, the record closed, and the matter was initially submitted 

for decision on September 1, 2021. On September 9, 2021, an order was issued re-

opening the record and directing complainant to file and serve a jurisdictional 

document missing as part of Exhibit 1. Complainant submitted the document. 

Respondent did not file an objection. On September 20, 2021, the record closed and 

the matter was submitted for decision. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Jurisdictional Matters 

1. 

On May 26, 2015, the Commission issued respondent a Preliminary Single 

Subject Teaching Credential, (Single Subject Credential), which expired on June 1, 

2020. 

2 

On or about August 26, 2013, the Commission issued respondent a 

Certificate of Clearance (Certificate), which expired on September 1, 2018. 

3. 

On or about September 9, 2019, the Commission received an application 

from respondent for a Clear Single Subject Teaching Credential. Respondent certified 

under penalty of perjury to the truthfulness of all the statements in the application. 

4. 

By letter dated November 22, 2019, Ani Kindall, Attorney for the 

Commission, informed respondent that on or about November 13 through 15, 2019, 

the Committee of Credentials (Committee) “found probable cause to recommend the 

revocation of [his] teaching credential(s) and all other certification documents and 

denial of [his] application.” Respondent was informed of his right to challenge the 

Committee’s decision and request a hearing. Respondent timely requested a hearing. 

5. 

On August 13, 2020, complainant, acting in her official capacity, signed 

and thereafter filed the Accusation and Statement of Issues. Complainant seeks to 

deny respondent’s application, and revoke all credentials, certificates, and 

authorizations issued to respondent, based on allegations that while on a non-district 

2

sponsored education trip to Costa Rica, he committed acts constituting moral 

turpitude and unprofessional and immoral conduct. Generally, complainant alleges 

respondent allowed students to drink alcohol, respondent drank alcohol with a 

chaperone parent M.M., kissed M.M. in front of students and was seen by a student 

performing oral sex on M.M. Complainant further alleged respondent sexually 

assaulted M.M. because she was too intoxicated to consent to the sexual conduct.

6. 

The matter was set for an evidentiary hearing before an Administrative 

Law Judge of the OAH, an independent adjudicative agency of the State of California, 

pursuant to Government Code section 11500 et seq. 

Costa Rica Trip 

7. 

In approximately August 2015, respondent was hired to teach Spanish at 

Johansen High School (Johansen), part of the Modesto City Schools. He continued to 

teach Spanish through the spring of 2018. In early 2018, respondent advertised to the 

students in his Spanish classes that he was organizing a trip to Costa Rica. The trip was 

arranged through EF Tours, a private tour company. The trip was not sponsored by 

Johansen or the Modesto City Schools. EF Tours trained respondent how to be a group 

leader for the Costa Rica trip he was planning.

8.

The trip to Costa Rica was scheduled to take place from March 27 until 

April 3, 2018. Johansen students were on spring break from March 24 until April 2, 

2018. As a result, students who attended to trip would miss several days of school. 

Respondent held at least one student meeting and one parent meeting after school to 

discuss the trip with interested students and parents. He also put up a poster 

advertising the trip and set out pamphlets about the trip in his classroom for students 

3

to take and review. Respondent sent emails to his students’ parents and guardians 

informing them about the trip. 

9. 

Parent chaperones M.M. and L

 and seven of respondent’s students 

signed up for the trip to Costa Rica. The students included L

’s daughter K

, 

M.M.’s daughter L.B., L

, I

, J

, and G

.1 Respondent did not 

know M.M. prior to the trip. L

, and A

2 testified at hearing concerning 

, A

, I

the events that occurred in Costa Rica.

10.  On March 27, 2018, the group met at San Francisco International Airport 

and travelled by plane to Costa Rica. They arrived in Costa Rica on March 28, 2018. 

Upon arriving at the airport, the group was met by a guide who transported them to 

the Buena Vista Lodge (Lodge) where they were to stay for the entire trip. The group 

was assigned various cabins to sleep in during their one-week stay. Respondent had 

his own cabin. The chaperones also had their own cabins. M.M.’s daughter L.B. stayed 

in her mother’s cabin. The remaining female students were assigned one cabin and the

male students another.

EVENTS ON MARCH 29, 2018 

11. 

The first day of the trip, the group had dinner at the Lodge and visited by 

the pool. The following day on March 29, 2018, the group left the Lodge to explore the 

town and visit a hot spring. The group returned to the Lodge for dinner. After dinner 

the students sat on the patio near the bar. Respondent and M.M. were seated next to 

 

1 Initials and first names are used to protect the privacy of the individuals.

2 Respondent called A

 as a witness.

4

each other at the bar drinking alcohol. There were shots of alcohol on a tray near the 

students at the patio area. The legal drinking age in Costa Rica is 18 years old. I

 

and G

were 18 years old. The remaining students were under 18. EF Tours had a 

policy that prohibited students from drinking alcohol even if the student was 18 years 

old. 

12. 

L

, I

, J

, L.B., and A

 all drank alcohol that evening. 

Respondent informed some of the students, including I

, that if their parents 

approved, they could drink alcohol. Respondent also stated that he would buy the 

alcohol, but “not to tell anybody.” Respondent observed students under the age of 18 

drinking alcohol. He did not inform those students they were not allowed to drink 

alcohol. During the evening, respondent bought I

 one or two shots of alcohol. 

Respondent consumed at least one shot of tequila. M.M. consumed approximately five 

alcoholic drinks. M.M. also purchased L.B. alcoholic drinks. 

13. 

At some point in the evening, L

, K

, and G

 returned to 

their cabins. Respondent asked M.M. and the remaining students to dance. 

Respondent taught the group a few dance steps. Respondent and M.M. danced 

together. Eventually, respondent and M.M. returned to the bar. The other students 

remained near the patio area. Respondent and M.M. began to kiss while they were 

seated at the bar, approximately 10 feet away from the students. L

, I

, and 

A

 observed M.M. and respondent kissing. L

 and I

 described M.M. and 

respondent as “making out.” L

 turned away from respondent and M.M. because 

she was uncomfortable seeing her teacher and M.M. kiss. The kissing went on for over 

one minute. I

 observed respondent leaning toward M.M. while they were kissing. 

One of the students commented that respondent and M.M. were kissing. L.B. 

saw her mother and respondent kissing. L.B. became upset and left the patio area. 

5

 and L.B. were not friends before the trip. However, I

 followed L.B. to the pool 

area of the Lodge because he could see she was upset and he did not want her to be 

alone. L.B. was upset and embarrassed that her mother and respondent were kissing. 

M.M. was married to L.B.’s step-father. Respondent was also married. After talking, 

 and L.B. walked toward the bar area to find M.M.

I

I

14.

L

, A

, and J

 also left the patio after they saw respondent 

and M.M. kissing. They went to J

’s cabin and then went looking for L.B. at her 

cabin. J

 walked ahead of L

 and A

 to M.M. and L.B.’s cabin. He came 

back to L

 and A

 and told them respondent and M.M. were at the cabin and 

to walk away. L.B. and I

 then approached J

, L

, and A

. J

 told 

L.B. not to go to her cabin. L.B. ignored J

’s direction and walked toward her cabin. 

I

 also went with L.B.

I

 and L.B. approached M.M.’s cabin. It was dark outside but there were 

lights from inside the cabin illuminating the patio in front of the cabin. I

 saw M.M. 

lying on her side on the cement patio. Her leggings were pulled down to her knees

and her vagina area was exposed. Respondent was on his hands and knees. His head 

was in between M.M.’s legs, with his face positioned in front of her vagina. It looked to 

I

 that respondent was performing oral sex on M.M. He did not hear M.M. making 

any sounds. I

 explained that he “felt really uncomfortable and froze up” when he 

saw respondent and M.M. L.B. yelled “what are you doing?” Respondent jumped up, 

adjusted his pants, and stated that he could “explain” and that “it was not what it 

looked like.” Respondent then started walking towards I

 and L.B. and said, “let’s 

talk.” L.B. told respondent to “get away” and she ran off. 

15. 

I

 followed L.B. to the pool area. She called her aunt to tell her what 

happened between respondent and M.M. L.B.’s aunt told I

 to take L.B. and M.M. 

6

back to their room and lock the door. L.B. and I

 walked to M.M.’s cabin. The lights 

inside were on, but the door was locked. They knocked on the door, but the cabin was 

empty. M.M. did not answer. I

 and L.B. turned around to leave and saw respondent 

walking up behind them. Respondent asked I

 and L.B. where M.M. was. L.B. 

responded that respondent was the last person to see M.M., so he should know. 

Respondent walked away and said that he would find M.M. At some point during the 

conversation, L.B. told respondent that she was going to call the police and let the 

school know what had happened. 

I

 and L.B. followed respondent. I

 believed that respondent knew where 

to find M.M. I

 and L.B. stayed some distance away from respondent so they could 

see him, but he would not be able to see or hear them. I

 and L.B. followed 

respondent on a pathway covered by trees and bushes. Respondent turned down a 

path. I

 and L.B. came around the corner of the path and saw M.M. on the ground. 

One of her arms was above her head. Her bikini bottom was pulled up high around her 

waist and was twisted. M.M. was mumbling, but I

 could not understand any words.

I

 saw respondent try to pick M.M. up off the ground. Respondent then dropped

M.M. to the ground. Respondent saw L.B. and I

 standing behind him. Respondent 

told L.B. that they needed to talk. He reached out to grab L.B. while he was trying to 

pick up M.M. off the ground. L.B. ran away and I

 followed her to his cabin. 

16. 

Shortly after they arrived at I

’s cabin, respondent knocked and asked 

to speak to I

. I

 told respondent he would talk to him at the pool. Respondent 

and I

 walked to the pool together and sat down. Respondent told I

 that he 

was sorry and that he “fucked up.” Respondent also stated that I

 could not “blame 

him” because M.M. was “fucking beautiful” and “fucking sexy.” I

 “cut off” 

respondent from continuing to talk because it was uncomfortable to hear respondent 

7

speak in that manner. I

 told respondent to go back to his room, lock the door, and 

not come out. Respondent agreed and walked toward his cabin. 

17. 

I

 and L.B. eventually returned to M.M.’s cabin. They found M.M. on 

the floor of the bathroom by the toilet. M.M. was partially undressed and unconscious. 

I

 and L.B. tried to wake up M.M. but could not. They picked her up and moved her 

to the bed. L.B. asked I

 to sleep in their cabin. He returned to his cabin to get a 

blanket and pillow. Students were in his cabin. Some of the students, including 

A

, went with I

 to M.M.’s cabin to sleep for the night. When they arrived, 

M.M. was awake. She indicated that the last thing she could recall was being by the 

pool that night before sunset. I

 observed that M.M. had bruises “all over her 

body.” A

 observed that M.M. had bruising on her arm and around her eyebrow 

bone. 

EVENTS AFTER MARCH 29, 2018 

18. 

At approximately 6:00 a.m. the next morning, respondent knocked on 

M.M.’s cabin door. No one answered the door. Through the door, respondent asked to 

talk to L.B. She did not respond. He then asked to speak to I

, who responded “no.” 

Respondent left. He then returned an hour or two later and told the students that they 

were supposed to go on a field trip. L.B. and I

 did not go on the field trip. The 

remaining students attended the field trip. During the field trip, respondent told J

, 

L

, A

, and G

 that he was sorry if the events from the night before 

made them uncomfortable.

19.

The morning of March 30, 2018, M.M. called the resort owners and 

reported that respondent had sexually assaulted her. The police arrived at the Lodge 

and took M.M. and L.B. to the hospital and then a police station. Later in the day, an EF 

8

Tour employee picked up I

 and took him to a hotel in Liberia, Costa Rica. M.M. 

and L.B. were also staying at the hotel in a different room. I

 was told that he would 

be taken to court to give a statement about what he observed. A local judge was not 

available for a few days. An EF Tours employee told M.M., L.B., and I

 to contact the 

American Embassy. They did so. I

 provided a statement to a judge at the embassy.

Later the same day, respondent was arrested by the Costa Rican authorities and 

ultimately charged with “sexual abuse against a person of age.” When the other 

students realized that respondent, M.M., L.B., and I

 were gone, they contacted 

their parents and guardians. J

’s stepfather travelled to Costa Rica and the 

remaining students finished the trip. The students eventually learned that respondent 

had been arrested. 

20.  On March 31, 2018, I

 flew back to the United States. He took a few 

days off school to try to recover from the experience. However, upon his return to 

school, students were talking about the incident, which made him uncomfortable. 

I

 continues to suffer from anxiety because he continues to see various images in 

his mind, including respondent dropping M.M. on the ground, and finding M.M. laying 

on the ground half-naked with respondent performing what looked like a sex act on 

M.M. 

21.  On April 4, 2018, M.M. went to Memorial Medical Center (Memorial) in 

Modesto, California. M.M. reported that she had been sexually assaulted by 

respondent. Officers from the Modesto Police Department were dispatched to 

Memorial to investigate M.M.’s report. An officer met with M.M., who explained that 

she was in Costa Rica as a parent chaperone for a school field trip. M.M. related what 

she could recall of the events. 

9

The officer observed that M.M. had a “black left eye, bruises on both arms and 

legs.” The officer took pictures of the injuries. M.M. was still wearing the clothes she 

had been in since March 29, 2018. The officer collected the clothes. A nurse conducted 

a sexual assault examination, which did not reveal “any semen in her vagina or any 

abnormalities.” 

22.  On June 20 and 21, 2019, a criminal trial was conducted in Costa Rica. 

Respondent was represented by counsel. Some students, including I

 and A

, 

travelled to the Costa Rican Embassy in Los Angeles to provide testimony. Respondent 

was “absolved” of any “penalty or responsibility” for the crime of sexual abuse against 

a person of age. Respondent returned to the United States. 

23.  Modesto City Schools filed an action against respondent to dismiss him 

from his position. Respondent and M.M.’s depositions were taken as part of the 

action.3 Effective on July 26, 2019, respondent resigned his position with Modesto City 

Schools pursuant to a settlement agreement. On September 17, 2019, the Commission 

received from Modesto City Schools “Notification of Credential Holder’s Change in 

Employment Status Due to Allegations of Misconduct.”

Respondent’s Additional Evidence

24. 

Respondent disputes that he engaged in any misconduct. He contends 

that L.B. fabricated claims against him that he sexually assaulted M.M. and convinced 

her mother she had been sexually assaulted because she did not like him as her 

3 M.M. was not available to testify for hearing. As a result, portions of her 

 

deposition were admitted into evidence. However, it was not necessary to rely upon 

her deposition testimony to find cause for discipline.

10

teacher. Respondent explained several instances when L.B. had failed to do her 

schoolwork and respondent penalized her as a result. Respondent contends that 

because of these incidents, she had a motive to lie about the events in Costa Rica.

Respondent suggested that because L.B. and I

 were friends, I

 likewise 

fabricated a story to support L.B.

25. 

Respondent also denied he was aware that students were drinking 

alcohol, other than L.B. Respondent contends that M.M. bought her daughter alcohol 

and because she was L.B.’s parent he did not take responsibility for telling her not to 

do so. Respondent claimed that “as far as he knew” the students were drinking non-

alcoholic drinks the evening of March 29, 2018. Respondent admitted that he drank 

alcohol that evening but denied purchasing alcohol for students. 

26. 

Respondent also contends that M.M. aggressively pursued him. 

Respondent believed M.M. had consumed approximately five alcoholic drinks 

throughout the evening. However, he did not believe that she was drunk. Respondent 

claimed that M.M. kissed him while they were at the bar, he allowed it for a few 

seconds, and then he pulled away telling M.M. that they should not be kissing. 

Respondent denied that he and M.M. kissed for more than a few seconds. M.M. 

attempted to continue to kiss him, but he would not allow it. Respondent noticed L.B. 

saw them kiss, so he told M.M. that they needed to find L.B. and explain what had 

occurred. Respondent and M.M. left the bar to find L.B. They walked to M.M.’s cabin. 

Respondent contends that during this time, M.M. continued to make sexual advances 

towards him, which he rejected. 

L.B. was not at the cabin when they arrived. Respondent contends that M.M. 

then pulled down her pants down to her knees, wrapped her arms around his neck and 

her legs around his body. They both fell to the ground on the patio. Respondent 

11

claimed that he tried to brace himself from the fall with outdoor furniture but was not 

able to do so. M.M. fell onto her back and respondent fell on top of her. Respondent 

then heard L.B. behind him say words to the effect of “what the fuck are you doing?” 

Respondent turned and saw L.B. and I

. Respondent stated to L.B. that “it is not 

what you think.” Respondent contends that L.B. then threated to “ruin” his life.

27. 

Respondent claims that he left M.M. and went after L.B. and I

 to 

explain what had occurred. He was not able to speak to them, so he went back to 

M.M.’s cabin to tell her that he was not able to speak to L.B. M.M. was missing, but 

I

 and L.B. were at the cabin. Respondent found M.M. lying in the middle of a path. 

He told M.M. that they needed to talk to L.B and he helped M.M. get up off the path. 

L.B. and I

 came upon them on the path. Respondent contends that L.B. threatened 

to tell her step-father what M.M. had done with respondent. L.B. and I

 than ran 

away.

M.M. got up to go after L.B. Respondent claimed M.M. was wearing sandals. She 

tripped and fell on her face. Respondent helped her get up. Respondent then took 

M.M. to her cabin and laid her on her bed. Respondent told M.M. that they would talk 

to L.B. and I

 in the morning and “clear everything up.” However, M.M. insisted that 

respondent talk to I

 that evening to tell him that they had not had sex. 

28. 

Respondent spoke to I

 that evening and told him nothing had 

happened between him and M.M. He told I

 to tell L.B. that he did not have sex 

with M.M. Respondent claimed he told I

 that M.M. “ain’t that hot,” suggesting that 

he was not interested in her sexually. However, respondent admitted during his 

deposition that he told I

 that M.M. was “hot.” 

12

29.

Respondent was arrested and held in prison in Costa Rica for a month. 

He hired private counsel and was released from prison while awaiting his trial. He was 

required to stay in Costa Rica until his trial was complete. A three-judge panel 

absolved him of the charge of sexual abuse against a person of age. M.M. did not 

testify at the trial. 

CHARACTER EVIDENCE 

30. 

Bertha Magana-Rios testified on behalf of respondent. Ms. Magana-Rios 

was a high school teacher for 19 years. She met respondent when he began working 

for Johansen as her student-teacher. Ms. Magana-Rios was the Department Chair 

when respondent applied to work for Johansen. She was involved in hiring him to work 

as a Spanish teacher. 

Ms. Magana-Rios described respondent as a respectful and hardworking young 

man. Ms. Magana-Rios never heard anything negative about respondent from 

students. She knows respondent’s wife and attended their wedding. Ms. Magana-Rios 

explained that she was “shocked” to learn about the accusations made against 

respondent concerning his alleged conduct in Costa Rica.

After respondent returned from Costa Rica, he provided Ms. Magana-Rios some 

details about the incident. He told Ms. Magana-Rios that he had one drink and that 

M.M. had too much to drink. He claimed that M.M. was “falling all over the place and 

hurt herself.” He also claimed that M.M. kissed him, that he was surprised and he

pushed back and “recoiled.” Ms. Magana-Rios also recalled that respondent explained 

that he and M.M. fell and he ended up on top of her.

13

The events respondent described did not change Ms. Magana-Rios’s opinion of 

his character or ability as a teacher. She explained that if she had the opportunity, she 

would hire him again because he is a “great role model.” 

31. 

Respondent submitted a performance evaluation from Johansen for the 

2016-2017 school year. Respondent met the objectives of the evaluation and was 

recommended for re-hire for the following year. Respondent also submitted an 

evaluation from Edison High School, Stockton Unified School District, for the 2019-

2020 school year. Respondent was hired as a Spanish teacher. He received an overall 

rating of “satisfactory.” The evaluation is not signed. 

Analysis 

32. 

In 

(1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, the California 

Supreme Court concluded that a teaching credential cannot be disciplined for immoral 

conduct, unprofessional conduct, or conduct involving moral turpitude “unless that 

conduct indicates that the [educator] is unfit to teach.” (

. at p. 229.) The Court 

outlined factors to consider when determining whether an educator’s conduct 

demonstrates unfitness to teach, which have been codified in California Code of 

Regulations, title 5, section 80302, subdivision (a). The factors are:

(1) the likelihood that the conduct may have adversely 

affected students or fellow teachers, and the degree of such 

adversity anticipated;

(2) the proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct;

(3) the types of credentials held or sought by the person 

involved;

14

(4) any extenuating or aggravating circumstances 

surrounding the conduct;

(5) the praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives 

resulting in the conduct; 

(6) the likelihood of recurrence of the questioned conduct; 

(7) the extent to which disciplinary action may have an 

adverse impact or chilling effect upon the constitutional 

rights of the person involved, or other teachers; and 

(8) the publicity or notoriety given to the conduct. 

LIKELIHOOD OF ADVERSE EFFECTS ON STUDENTS OR FELLOW TEACHERS

33. 

The evidence of adverse effects on respondent’s students because of his 

conduct in Costa Rica is overwhelming. Respondent was responsible to ensure the 

health and safety of students he took to another country. He failed to do so. L

, 

I

, and A

’s version of events are the most credible. These students were not 

motivated to lie, particularly I

. Contrary to respondent’s assertion, I

 was not 

friends with L.B. prior to the Costa Rica trip. I

 comforted L.B. in Costa Rica because 

she was understandably distraught about what she saw between respondent and her 

mother. I

’s testimony was candid and sincere. As a result, the students’ testimony 

was given great weight.

34.

The evidence established that respondent drank alcohol in front of his 

students, allowed students to drink alcohol and purchased alcohol for at least one 

student. Respondent’s testimony that he was not aware his students were drinking 

alcohol was not credible. L

, I

, and A

 each testified they consumed 

15

alcohol and that respondent saw students drinking. L

 and A

 were under 18 

years old. Respondent also purchased alcohol for I

. 

Respondent’s students were not allowed to drink alcohol. Respondent’s 

contention that he assumed the students were not drinking alcohol demonstrates that 

he failed to take responsibility for the students. Respondent had an obligation to 

ensure students were not drinking alcohol, which included communicating to the 

students that they were not allowed to drink alcohol, by setting an example of not 

drinking alcohol in front of the students, and by monitoring the students’ behavior to 

ensure that no student was drinking alcohol. 

35. 

Respondent also engaged in extremely inappropriate conduct with M.M. 

in front of students. L

, I

, and A

 saw respondent and M.M. kissing for 

over a minute. L

 and I

 described respondent and M.M. as “making out.” 

Respondent was seen leaning towards M.M. to kiss. Seeing respondent and M.M. kiss 

understandably made the students uncomfortable and upset. 

Respondent’s contention that he only kissed M.M. for a few seconds and then 

pulled away to stop M.M. from kissing him is not credible. If the kissing had been as 

brief as respondent described, it is unlikely so many students would have seen the 

incident. They certainly would not have described the two as “making out.” 

36. 

The evidence also established that respondent engaged in inappropriate 

sexual conduct with M.M. at her cabin. I

 credibly testified that when he and L.B. 

walked up to M.M.’s cabin, he observed M.M. laying on her side on the outdoor patio 

ground. Her leggings were pulled down to her knees exposing her vagina. 

Respondent’s face was positioned in front of her exposed vagina. I

 believed based 

on his observation that respondent was performing oral sex on M.M. It is not 

16

necessary to determine if respondent sexually assaulted M.M. or if she had the ability 

to consent. The adverse effects to respondent’s students who observed him with his 

head by the exposed vagina of a parent chaperone was traumatizing to the students. 

Again, respondent’s version of events is not credible. Respondent claimed that 

M.M. had pulled her pants down, wrapped her arms around his neck and legs around 

his body. They then fell to the ground and he landed on top of M.M. It is not clear how 

M.M. could have wrapped her legs around respondent with her leggings down to her 

knees restricting her leg movement. Additionally, to believe respondent’s version of 

events, I

 and L.B. would have walked up to M.M.’s cabin at the exact moment 

respondent fell on M.M. This does not explain how respondent’s face was positioned 

at M.M.’s exposed vagina. 

37. 

I

 was also subjected to respondent’s extremely unprofessional and 

inappropriate justification for his conduct. Respondent told I

 he could not “blame 

him” for his conduct because M.M. was “fucking beautiful” and “fucking sexy.” I

 

was so uncomfortable with respondent’s language, that he stopped respondent from 

talking, and directed him to return to his cabin. 

Respondent’s contention he told I

 that M.M. “ain’t that hot” further exposes 

the inconsistencies in respondent’s version of events. Specifically, respondent admitted 

during his deposition that he told I

 that M.M. was “hot.” Respondent did not 

explain why he would be speaking in such an unprofessional way to a student about a 

parent chaperone or how it supports his version of events that he did not engage in 

inappropriate sexual conduct with M.M. 

38. 

The aftermath of the events in Costa Rica also had adverse effects on 

students. Respondent was arrested. Students had to call home and explain that their 

17

teacher had been arrested and taken to jail. Another parent had to travel to Costa Rica 

to supervise the students. I

 was transported to another town to give a statement 

to a judge. He then returned home and was faced with continuing anxiety from the 

events. 

39. 

As an educator, respondent is expected to exercise good judgment, set a 

good example, and be a positive role model. Respondent was entrusted to care for 

seven students in Costa Rica. Instead of putting the health and safety of his students 

first, he focused on himself, exposing his students to the adverse effects of alcohol and 

his sexual misconduct with a chaperone. 

PROXIMITY OR REMOTENESS IN TIME 

40. 

Respondent’s conduct occurred in March 2018. However, students were 

still involved in his criminal trial in May 2019. Only two years have passed since he 

resigned his position from Modesto City Schools in June 2019. Respondent’s 

misconduct is more proximate than remote in time.

TYPES OF CREDENTIALS HELD AND SOUGHT

41.

Respondent held a Single Subject Credential. He seeks a Clear Single 

Subject Teaching Credential. The credential respondent is seeking requires teaching 

competence. 

EXTENUATING OR AGGRAVATING CIRCUMSTANCES

42.  Neither the Education Code nor the applicable regulations specify what 

constitutes “extenuating circumstances.” However, California Code of Regulations, title 

5, section 80300, subdivision (m), defines “mitigating factor” as “an event or 

circumstance which demonstrates that the public, school children and the profession 

18

would be adequately protected by a more lenient degree of adverse action or no 

adverse action whatsoever.” Respondent denied any misconduct and presented no 

mitigating evidence. 

43. 

California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80300, subdivision (b), lists 

aggravating factors, the presence of which indicate a greater degree of discipline is 

necessary to protect students and the teaching profession. These factors include, in 

pertinent part: (1) the misconduct in question involved multiple wrongful acts; and (2) 

the misconduct significantly harmed the educational system.

Respondent’s misconduct involved multiple wrongful acts including allowing 

students to drink alcohol, engaging in sexual misconduct with a parent chaperone that 

was observed by multiple students, and behaving in an unprofessional manner 

towards parents and students. For the reasons explained in Factual Findings 33 

through 39, respondent’s conduct significantly harmed the students, who are a part of 

the educational system. Additionally, respondent’s conduct harmed the educational 

system by placing teachers and Modesto City Schools in a negative light both abroad 

and in the community. 

MISCONDUCT 

PRAISEWORTHINESS OR BLAMEWORTHINESS OF MOTIVES RESULTING IN THE 

44. 

Respondent’s motives for his conduct appears to be self-serving in 

pursuit of his romantic and sexual interest in a parent chaperone. Respondent failed to 

provide any insight into his conduct because he denied any responsibility. There is 

nothing praiseworthy about respondent’s conduct. 

19

LIKELIHOOD OF RECURRENCE

45.

Respondent denied any responsibility for his conduct. Because he failed 

to demonstrate any insight into his conduct and the harm it caused to his students, it 

is likely that he will engage in future misconduct. 

ADVERSE IMPACT OR CHILLING EFFECT 

46.

There is no evidence that discipline would adversely impact or chill 

respondent or any other teacher in the free exercise of their constitutional rights.

PUBLICITY OR NOTORIETY OF MISCONDUCT 

47. 

Respondent’s conduct was publicized and notorious. His conduct was 

known to the students and parents in Costa Rica. Respondent was arrested and 

arrangements had to be made to keep the students safe. As a result, information 

about respondent’s conduct and arrest had to be shared to EF Tours, parents and 

guardians, and authorities in Costa Rica. Additionally, information about respondent’s 

conduct was discussed by students at Johansen. Students were asked to participate in 

respondent’s criminal trial, which was also discussed among students and parents.

CONCLUSION

48. 

For the reasons stated above, and considering all the 

 factors, 

complainant established by clear and convincing evidence that cause exists to 

discipline respondent. Based on the evidence, it would not be consistent with the 

public interest to allow respondent to retain his existing credentials or to renew his 

credentials at this time. 

20

4.

Education Code section 44345 provides in part:

The commission may deny any application for the issuance 

of a credential or for the renewal of a credential made by 

any applicant who falls under any of the following 

categories: 

[¶] . . . [¶]

[¶] . . . [¶]

(e) Has committed any act involving moral turpitude. 

Any denial pursuant to subdivisions (a) to (e), inclusive, shall 

be based upon reasons related to the applicant’s fitness to 

teach or fitness to perform other duties for which that 

applicant is certificated, or competence to perform the 

duties which the credential would authorize the applicant to 

perform. 

5. 

Education Code section 44440 provides:

(a) No applicant who is under review by the commission 

shall be allowed to withdraw his or her application for a 

credential without the written consent of the commission. 

The commission shall retain its authority over those 

applicants to proceed with the denial of the credential upon 

any ground provided by law, or to enter an order denying 

the credential upon any ground provided by law. 

22

(b) The suspension or expiration of any credential, its 

surrender without the written consent of the commission, or 

a revocation pursuant to Section 44423 does not deprive 

the commission of its authority to do any of the following: 

(1) Institute or continue a disciplinary proceeding against 

the credential holder upon any ground provided by law. 

(2) Enter an order suspending or revoking the credential. 

(3) Issue a public reproval or private admonition to the 

credential holder. 

6. 

Education Code section 44421 provides in part: 

The Commission on Teacher Credentialing shall privately 

admonish, publicly reprove, revoke or suspend for immoral 

or unprofessional conduct, or for persistent defiance of, and 

refusal to obey, the laws regulating the duties of persons 

serving in the public school system, or for any cause that 

would have warranted the denial of an application for a 

credential or the renewal thereof, or for evident unfitness 

7. 

California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 803000 states in part that: 

(a) “Adverse action” is a denial, a private admonition, public 

reproval, suspension or a revocation of one or more 

for service. 

credentials. 

23

(b) “Aggravating factor” is an event or circumstance which 

demonstrates that a greater degree of adverse action for an 

act of professional misconduct is needed to adequately 

protect the public, schoolchildren or the profession. 

Aggravating factors may include, but are not limited to, the 

following: 

[¶] . . . [¶]

(2) that the misconduct evidences multiple acts of 

wrongdoing or demonstrate a pattern of misconduct;

(3) that the misconduct was surrounded by or followed by 

bad faith, dishonesty or other violation of the laws 

governing educators;

[¶] . . . [¶]

(c) “Applicant” is an individual applying for a credential, 

permit, waiver or other certification document issued by the 

Commission on Teacher Credentialing. 

8. 

As set forth in Factual Finding 32, California Code of Regulations, title 5, 

section 80302, subdivision (a), provides the factors to consider to “determine the 

relationship between the alleged misconduct and the applicant’s or holder’s fitness, 

competence, or ability to effectively perform the duties authorized by the credential.”

9. 

The California Supreme Court has recognized that the terms “immoral 

conduct” and “unprofessional conduct” substantially overlap one another and conduct 

that constitutes one often includes the other. (

., 

, 1 

24

Cause for Discipline

11.

As set forth in the Factual Findings as a whole, complainant established 

by clear and convincing evidence that respondent committed acts of unprofessional

conduct. Cause exists to discipline respondent’s Single Subject Credential and 

Certificate pursuant to Education Code section 44421.

12. 

As set forth in the Factual Findings as a whole, complainant established 

by clear and convincing evidence that respondent committed acts that consist of 

immoral conduct. Cause exists to discipline respondent’s Single Subject Credential and 

Certificate pursuant to Education Code section 44421.

13. 

As set forth in the Factual Findings as a whole, complainant established 

by clear and convincing evidence that respondent committed acts of moral turpitude.

Cause exists to discipline respondent’s Single Subject Credential and Certificate 

pursuant to Education Code sections 44421 and 44435, subdivision (e). 

Cause for Denial 

14. 

Respondent has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the 

evidence that he is entitled to the credential he seeks. He failed to present such 

evidence. As set forth in the Factual Findings as a whole, respondent committed acts 

of moral turpitude. Cause exists to deny respondent’s application for a Clear Single 

Subject Teaching Credential pursuant to Education Code section 44345, subdivision 

(e). 

26

