BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Accusation against: 

Anna Van Loon, Respondent 

Agency Case Nos. 1-748409982 & 1-986064532 

OAH No. 2020011095 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Erin R. Koch-Goodman, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ), Office of Administrative 

Hearings (OAH), State of California, heard this matter telephonically on June 16, 2020, 

in Sacramento, California. 

Kristina Jarvis, Deputy Attorney General, represented Mary Vixie Sandy, Ed.D. 

(complainant), Executive Director, California Commission on Teacher Credentialing 

(CTC or Commission).

Anna Van Loon (respondent) failed to appear.

Oral and documentary evidence was received. The record was closed and the 

matter was submitted for decision on June 16, 2020. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS

Jurisdictional Matters 

1.

On June 16, 20101, the CTC issued a Level II Education Specialist 

Instruction Credential (Credential) to respondent. Said Credential authorizes 

respondent to: provide English learners instruction for English language development 

in grades 12 and below, including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for 

adults (ELA1); and, conduct assessments related to students access to the academic 

core curriculum and progress towards meeting instructional academic goals, provide 

instruction, and Special Education (SE) Support to individuals with a primary disability 

of autism, moderate/severe intellectual disabilities, deaf-blind, emotional disturbance, 

and multiple disabilities, to students in kindergarten, grades 1 through 12 through age 

22, and classes organized primarily for adults in services across the continuum of 

program options available (R3MS). The Credential will expire on April 1, 2024, unless 

renewed or revoked. 

      

1 The Accusation identifies March 27, 2014, as the original issue date for 

respondent’s Education Specialist Instruction Credential, but the Commission’s website 

identifies the original issue date as June 16, 2010 (Exhibit 2). The date on the 

Commission’s website is used. 

2

Conduct at Issue

INTOXICATION AT SCHOOL 

2.

In August 2013, respondent began teaching for the Rocklin Unified 

School District (Rocklin USD). For the 2016/2017 and 2017/2018 school year, 

respondent taught SE students at Rocklin High School (HS). On or about May 31, 2017, 

Davis Stewart, Rocklin HS Principal, received reports respondent was intoxicated at 

school. On June 2, 2017, Principal Stewart and Colleen Slattery, Rocklin Human 

Resources (HR) Assistant Superintendent, met with respondent to discuss the reports 

of her intoxication while at school, and directed her to get help. Respondent 

requested, and was placed on “stress leave” for the remainder of the school year, four 

days, from June 5, through 8, 2017. 

3. 

In August 2017, respondent returned to teach SE classes at Rocklin HS. 

Principal Stewart and his staff made day-to-day observations of respondent’s 

classroom and found no evidence of her using alcohol. However, on September 21, 

Principal Stewart again received reports respondent was intoxicated at school, 

including a report from an SE Program Specialist, who had gone into respondent’s 

classroom and observed her for 20 minutes (approximately 1:50 p.m. to 2:10 p.m.). 

Principal Stewart went to respondent’s classroom and observed her for 20 minutes 

(2:20 p.m. to 2:40 p.m.), and found her to have objective signs of intoxication.  

4. 

Principal Stewart then called HR Assistant Superintendent Slattery, who 

directed Principal Stewart to have someone remain with respondent and escort 

respondent to his office at the end of the school day (3:00 p.m.), to meet with HR 

Director Matthew Murphy. Principal Stewart called the School Resource Officer Jeremy 

Duckham, a Rocklin Police Officer, and asked him to report to his office at 3:00 p.m. for 

3

an alcohol/drug intoxication evaluation. Principal Stewart also called the Rocklin 

Teachers Professional Association (RTPA) President, and asked him to join the meeting 

on respondent’s behalf. 

5. 

At 3:00 p.m., Principal Stewart and HR Director Murphy met with 

respondent and the RTPA President to discuss respondent’s conduct. Respondent was 

placed on Administrative Leave. Principal Stewart then introduced respondent to 

Officer Duckham for an alcohol/drug intoxication evaluation. Officer Duckham 

observed respondent to have objective signs of intoxication, including red and watery 

eyes, slow and slurred speech, slow and deliberate movements, and the smell of 

alcohol emanating from her person. Officer Duckham asked respondent to complete a 

series of field sobriety tests (FSTs), as well as a Preliminary Alcohol Screening (PAS), 

but the RTPA President refused on respondent’s behalf and offered to drive 

respondent home. Believing respondent to be a danger to herself and others, Officer 

Duckham placed respondent under arrest for public intoxication, pursuant to Penal 

Code section 647, subdivision (f). He then transported respondent to the South Placer 

jail, booked her, and arranged for her to be released without additional charges once 

sober. 

6. 

Respondent remained on Administrative Leave until January 12, 2018, 

when she resigned from Rocklin pursuant to a Resignation and Release Settlement 

Agreement. On January 22, 2018, Rocklin USD sent the Commission a letter, notifying 

it respondent had resigned her teaching position pending an investigation of 

unprofessional conduct – intoxication at school (CTC Case No. 1-74809982). On or 

about February 5, 2018, respondent began teaching SE in the Natomas USD. 

7. 

On December 21, 2018, the CTC wrote respondent, notifying her of its 

recommendation to revoke her Credential based upon her intoxication at school. On 

4

January 18, 2019, respondent wrote CTC, requesting reconsideration and an 

administrative hearing. On February 22, 2019, the CTC wrote respondent, notifying her 

of its recommendation to sustain the revocation of her Credential. 

INTOXICATION IN PUBLIC

8.

On June 21, 2018, the Lincoln Police Department received a report that 

respondent was in the Target parking lot, at 950 Groveland Lane, Lincoln, appeared to 

be intoxicated, and was seen walking towards her vehicle with her car keys in her 

hands. Officer Travis Parson was dispatched to the scene. In route, Lincoln Police 

Department updated Officer Parson, indicating respondent had driven out of the 

Target parking lot and was near her residence. Officer Parson was given respondent’s 

home address and drove there. Upon arrival, Officer Parson found respondent in her 

driveway, standing behind her vehicle and shutting the trunk. She was carrying a white 

shopping bag in her hands. Officer Parson made contact with respondent and 

questioned her. Respondent denied drinking alcohol, but Officer Parson observed 

several objective signs of alcohol intoxication, including bloodshot watery eyes and 

the odor of an alcohol beverage emanating from respondent’s person. Officer Parson 

administered FSTs; respondent performed poorly. Officer Parson asked respondent if 

she would take a PAS; she declined. Officer Parson then placed respondent under 

arrest and took her to the Lincoln Police Department, where he administered a 

Breathalyzer test, resulting in a 0.26 percent blood alcohol level (BAC). Respondent’s 

blood was also drawn, resulting in a 0.218 percent BAC.

9.

On October 4, 2018, in the Superior Court, County of Placer, Case No. 62-

161150, respondent was convicted, on a plea of nolo contendere, of violating Vehicle 

Code section 23152, subdivisions (a), driving under the influence (DUI) of alcohol, and 

(b) DUI with a BAC greater than 0.08 percent, both misdemeanors. Respondent was 

5

sentenced to 25 days in jail and three years of conditional probation, and ordered to 

complete a nine month First Offender program, a DUI Panel, self-help classes once a 

week for six months, and pay fines and fees. 

10.  On June 28, 2019, CTC wrote respondent, notifying her of its 

recommendation to revoke her Credential, as a result of her October 2018 DUI 

conviction (CTC Case No. 1-986064532). On July 8, 2019, respondent wrote CTC, 

requesting an administrative hearing. 

11.  On August 21, 2019, complainant issued an Accusation against 

respondent, consolidating Case Nos. 1-74809982 and 1-986064532, and alleging four 

causes of discipline: (1) unprofessional conduct, (2) immoral acts, (3) evident unfitness 

for service, and (4) addiction to intoxicating beverages. Specifically, complainant 

alleges respondent: on September 21, 2017, appeared at Rocklin HS and taught SE 

students while under the influence of alcohol; on June 21, 2018, drove a vehicle while 

under the influence of alcohol; and on October 4, 2018, pled nolo contendere and was 

convicted of the same. The matter was set for an evidentiary hearing before an ALJ 

with OAH, an independent adjudicative agency of the State of California, pursuant to 

Government Code section 11500 et seq. 

Discussion 

12. 

The Accusation and Notice of Hearing were properly served on 

respondent. However, respondent failed to appear at hearing. Complainant called 

Principal Stewart and Officer Duckham to testify at hearing; their testimony was 

unchallenged. Respondent’s conduct evidences an addiction to alcohol and a 

complete disregard for her students, Rocklin USD, the law, and the Commission. Based 

upon the Factual Findings as a whole, respondent is subject to discipline by the 

6

Commission. Based on the circumstances presented at hearing, respondent’s 

Credential should be revoked.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

Burden and Standard of Proof 

1. 

In an administrative proceeding in which a licensing agency seeks the 

suspension or revocation of an existing, professional license, the standard of proof is 

clear and convincing evidence to a reasonable certainty. (

(1982) 135 Cal.App.3d 583.) Clear and convincing evidence requires 

proof that is so clear as to leave no substantial doubt and that is sufficiently strong to 

command the unhesitating assent of every reasonable mind. (

 

(2008) 169 Cal.App.4th 176, 190.) 

2. 

The burden of proving the charges rests upon the party making the 

charges. (

(2008) 165 Cal.App.4th 1, 4.) 

Therefore, complainant bears the burden of proving the existence of grounds for 

disciplining respondent’s Credential, and such evidence must be clear and convincing 

to a reasonable certainty. (See, 

(1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1036, 1039-1040 [recognizing that the clear and convincing 

evidence standard applies to proceedings to discipline a teacher’s credential, whereas 

the lesser preponderance of the evidence standard applies to proceedings to dismiss a 

teacher from particular employment].) 

Authority to Discipline 

3. 

Education Code section 44421 provides in part: 

7

The Commission on Teacher Credentialing shall privately 

admonish, publicly reprove, revoke or suspend for immoral 

or unprofessional conduct . . . or for any cause that would 

have warranted the denial of an application for a credential 

or the renewal thereof, or for evident unfitness for service. 

4. 

Education Code section 44345, subdivision (c), provides that the 

Commission may deny any application for the issuance of a credential made by any 

applicant who falls under specified categories including one who “is addicted to the 

use of intoxicating beverages to excess.”

Causes of Action 

IMMORAL AND UNPROFESSIONAL CONDUCT 

5. 

The term “immoral” has been defined generally as that which is hostile to 

the welfare of the general public and contrary to good morals. Immorality has not 

been confined to sexual matters, but includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or 

that is indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; or as willful, 

flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral indifference to the opinions of 

respectable members of the community, and as an inconsiderate attitude toward good 

order and the public welfare. (

 (1951) 36 Cal.2d 734, 

740.) 

6. 

The phrase “unprofessional conduct” is conduct such as to indicate 

unfitness to teach. (

(1983) 149 

Cal.App.3d 1167, 1174.) The Commission may only take adverse action against a 

teacher’s credential when the underlying conduct demonstrates his or her unfitness to 

teach. (See, 

(2010) 184 

8

Cal.App.4th 462, 473.) The California Supreme Court has delineated factors for 

determining whether particular conduct demonstrates unfitness to teach. (See, 

Code, § 13202, predecessor to Ed. Code, § 44421.) But “only the pertinent 

(1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 229-230 [analyzing former Ed. 

factors need to be analyzed.” (

, 184 Cal.App.4th at p. 476.)

FITNESS TO TEACH 

7. 

The Commission has adopted a regulation which includes the 

factors. California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80302, subdivision (a), provides: 

The Committee, in conducting its investigation, shall 

determine the relationship between the alleged misconduct 

and the applicant’s or holder’s fitness, competence, or 

ability to effectively perform the duties authorized by the 

credential. Such relationship may be based on facts which 

include, but are not limited to, the following:

(1) The likelihood that the conduct may have adversely 

affected students, fellow teachers, or the educational 

community, and the degree of such adversity anticipated;

(2) The proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct;

(3) The type of credential held or applied for by the person 

involved;

(4) The extenuating or aggravating circumstances 

surrounding the conduct;

9

(5) The praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives 

resulting in the conduct; 

(6) The likelihood of the recurrence of the questioned 

conduct; 

(7) The extent to which disciplinary action may inflict an 

adverse impact or chilling effect upon the constitutional 

rights of the person involved, or other certified persons; 

(8) The publicity or notoriety given to the conduct. 

8. 

Applying the 

 factors, respondent’s conduct demonstrates an 

unfitness to teach. Respondent has a Level II Education Specialist Instruction 

Credential. In 2017, respondent taught SE students at Rocklin HS. On more than one 

occasion, respondent appeared at school to teach while intoxicated and also drove a 

vehicle while under the influence of alcohol. Respondent’s conduct caused harm to 

students, fellow teachers, the educational community, and the public at large. Sadly, 

the damage was irreparable, including lost confidence and trust, fear, missing 

curriculum, physical injury, and emotional pain. In addition, respondent’s behavior 

suggests an addiction to alcohol, and without professional help, respondent’s behavior 

is very likely to recur. Further, respondent’s conduct evidences several aggravating 

factors2, including: multiple acts of wrongdoing or a pattern of misconduct; the 

misconduct significantly harmed a child entrusted to the care of a credential holder or 

2 An “[a]ggravating factor” is an event or circumstance which demonstrates that 

      

a greater degree of adverse action for an act of professional misconduct is needed to 

adequately protect the public, schoolchildren or the profession.

10

applicant, or significantly harmed the public or the educational system; and the holder 

or applicant had prior notice, warnings or reprimands for similar conduct from any 

reliable source. (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80300, subd. (b)(2), (4) & (6).) Finally, there are 

no constitutional issues involved in this case, and no evidence of publicity or notoriety 

either. However, the Rocklin USD owes a duty to its students to provide a safe and 

stable learning environment, and if appropriate adverse action is not taken, there is a 

risk of negative publicity and notoriety for the Commission and Rocklin USD. 

EVIDENT UNFITNESS FOR SERVICE

9. 

“Evident unfitness for service” means clearly not fit, not adapted to or 

unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of temperamental defects or

inadequacies. Unlike “unprofessional conduct,” “evident unfitness for service” connotes 

a fixed character trait, presumably not remediable merely on receipt of notice that 

one’s conduct fails to meet professional standards. (

(1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444.) 

Causes for Adverse Action 

10.

Based upon the Factual Findings as a whole, cause exists under Education 

Code sections 44421 and 44345, subdivision (c), for adverse action against 

respondent’s Credential on the grounds of unprofessional conduct, immoral acts, 

evident unfitness for service, and addiction to intoxicating beverages. It was

established by clear and convincing evidence that, at a minimum, on September 21, 

2017, respondent appeared at school and taught SE students while intoxicated, and on 

June 21, 2018, respondent drove a vehicle under the influence of alcohol. 

11. 

Complainant seeks revocation of respondent’s Credential. Based upon 

the Factual Findings as a whole, complainant has proven respondent engaged in 

11

immoral and unprofessional conduct and displayed an addiction to alcohol, making 

her unfit to teach; as well as demonstrated an evident unfitness for service. For all the 

above reasons, the public interest and safety requires that respondent’s teaching 

credential be revoked. 

ORDER

Respondent Anna Van Loon’s Level II Education Specialist Instruction Credential 

is hereby REVOKED.

DATE: July 15, 2020

ERIN R. KOCH-GOODMAN

Administrative Law Judge

Office of Administrative Hearings

12

