BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Accusation against: 

GEORGE JOSEPH MARIA, Respondent 

Agency Case No. 2-13545868 

OAH No. 2020100122 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Tiffany L. King, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings 

(OAH), State of California, heard this matter by videoconference on March 23 and 24, 

2021, from Sacramento, California.

Stephanie Alamo-Latif, Deputy Attorney General, represented complainant Mary 

Vixie Sandy, Ed.D., Executive Director of the Commission on Teacher Credentialing 

(Commission).

who was present. 

Ernest Tuttle IV, Attorney at Law, represented respondent George Joseph Maria, 

Oral and documentary evidence was received, the record closed, and the matter 

submitted for decision on March 24, 2021. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS

Jurisdictional Matters 

1.

The Commission is responsible for the credentialing of public school 

teachers. On December 10, 2007, the Commission issued a Clear Single Subject 

Teaching Credential (credential) to respondent. The credential will expire on February 

1, 2023, unless renewed or revoked. 

2. 

At all relevant times, respondent was employed by the Stockton Unified 

School District (District) at its Cesar Chavez High School campus. Respondent resigned 

from his position, effective June 30, 2019. The student population at Cesar Chavez 

High School is predominately Hispanic and African-American, and/or from a low 

socioeconomic background. Many of its students are first-generation high school 

students, and a significant number are homeless. 

3. 

On August 13, 2020, complainant made and filed the Accusation, seeking 

to revoke respondent’s credential based on allegations he had sex with another 

teacher when he was scheduled to be teaching class, and that the encounter was 

witnessed and videoed by a student. Respondent timely filed a Notice of Defense. This 

hearing followed. 

Conduct at Issue 

4. 

In the fall of 2017, respondent taught four periods a day. First through 

third periods were World History; fourth period was for Cyber High, an online 

curriculum program for students who were behind in credits. His lunch “hour” was the 

40-minute period following second period. After school, he supervised the 

independent study program. 

2

5.

On September 12, 2017, during second period, respondent left his 

classroom, while it was still in-session. He went to the career center, located on the

second story of the administrative building, an approximate two-minute walk from 

respondent’s classroom. At the career center, he met with Ms. Ernest, 1 the head 

counselor, for less than one minute regarding a new independent study student. After 

leaving the career center, respondent ran into a female teacher, MC,2 in the stairwell. 

MC asked respondent if he would help her find speakers for her classroom. The two 

teachers went to the third floor and entered a storage room to look for speakers. 

Unbeknownst to the teachers, a ninth-grade student, CT,3 was already in the storage 

room. When the teachers entered, Student CT hid behind some storage boxes. 

6. 

Shortly after entering the storage room, the teachers began kissing. 

Student CT recorded the teachers with his cellular telephone; the video was offered 

and admitted at hearing. In the video, respondent remained standing, pulled down his 

pants and underwear. MC, who was sitting, began to perform oral sex on him. After 

one to two minutes, MC stopped, stood up and walked out of frame. Respondent 

remained standing in the same place, with his hands in his groin area.4 Less than a 

 

1 Ms. Ernest’s first name was not in the record. 

2 MC’s initials are used to protect her privacy. 

3 Student CT’s initials are used to protect his privacy. 

4 The Accusation alleges that, after MC stopped performing oral sex respondent 

masturbated to ejaculation. He then cleaned himself with a piece of binder paper, 

which he crumpled and discarded in a waste bin in the room. Respondent denies these 

allegations. Other than respondent’s testimony, there is no direct evidence to establish 

3

minute later, MC returned and sat down in front of respondent. Respondent bent 

down and kissed MC on the mouth, after which both teachers laughed. 

7. 

The storage room is an “off-limits” area to students without supervision, 

although students were known to access it without permission. Student CT told school

administrators he had entered the storage room to retrieve a sweater he had left 

behind a day earlier. 

District Investigation 

8. 

Craig Wells was the Assistant Superintendent of Human Resources for 

the District from 2011 until his retirement in 2019. On September 12, 2017, he was 

contacted by Cesar Chavez High School Assistant Principal Roberts and advised of 

Student CT’s allegations against respondent and MC. Mr. Wells prepared the necessary 

paperwork to place both teachers on paid administrative leave pending an 

investigation. He then contacted the teachers’ union representatives and asked them 

to meet at campus that afternoon. 

9. 

Mr. Wells briefly interviewed respondent on the afternoon of September 

12, 2017. Respondent admitted to engaging in sexual acts with MC, but was not 

specific. Respondent’s union representative asked for more time to retain counsel. 

Respondent was then was placed on paid administrative leave and sent home. Mr. 

Wells also interviewed MC, who admitted she was the woman depicted in the video. 

 

precisely what he was doing to himself after MC had stopped or where he disposed of 

the binder paper. The video is grainy and blurry. Student CT did not testify at hearing, 

and his statements to the administration on these points are inadmissible hearsay. 

4

10. Mr. Wells interviewed respondent a second time on October 5, 2017.

During the interview, respondent was represented by his attorney, Mr. Tuttle. Mr. Wells 

showed respondent photo stills extracted from the video; respondent admitted he and 

MC were the two individuals depicted in the photos. He admitted he left his in-session 

class during second period and went to the career center to meet with Ms. Ernest 

about a new independent study student. Respondent explained he left his in-session 

classroom “fairly regularly,” one to two times a week; usually, he left to meet with Ms. 

Ernest at the career center. He always asked a campus security monitor (CSM) or 

another teacher to supervise his classroom in his absence. 

11. 

Respondent stated he ran into MC after leaving the career center and 

they went to the third floor to look for some speakers. Once there, he admitted to 

pulling down his pants and allowing MC to orally copulate him. Respondent stated he 

had a “very close friendship” with MC for the past year, but asserted this was the first 

time they had been physically intimate. 

12. 

By letter dated May 22, 2018, the District issued respondent a Notice of 

Intent for Dismissal based on the September 12, 2017 incident. Following a Skelly 

hearing, a Statement of Charges was filed against respondent. In November 2018, 

respondent resigned from his position at Cesar Chavez High School pursuant to a 

stipulated settlement agreement with the District. His resignation was effective June 

30, 2019. 

13. 

The District did not receive any formal complaints or inquiries from 

students, parents, or the public regarding respondent and MC’s behavior. There was 

no known media coverage or other publicity concerning the incident. However, there 

were rumors and gossip, and respondent’s separation was discussed amongst the 

teaching staff as well as students for some time. 

5

Respondent’s Evidence

RESPONDENT’S TESTIMONY

14.

Respondent is 45 years old. He is married to his high school sweetheart, 

with whom he has twin sons, age 16. He was born and raised in Stockton and had a 

difficult upbringing. This experience helps him understand the “pitfalls and traps” that 

often befall inner city youth, and caused him to pursue a career in education. 

15. 

In 2004, respondent received an emergency credential. He began 

working as a substitute teacher with the District during the 2004/2005 school year. He 

was later offered a permanent position at Fremont Middle School, where he taught for 

two years. He received his preliminary credential in 2005, and a single subject 

credential in social sciences in December 2007. 

16. 

Respondent began teaching at Cesar Chavez High School during the 

2006/2007 school year. From 2006 until 2018, he taught social science, geography, 

humanities, history, and economics. He also supervised the independent study 

program, and the Credit Recovery program, also known as Cyber High. 

17.  Outside of his usual teaching duties, respondent served as athletic coach, 

department chair, afterschool program coordinator, student club advisor, and summer 

school instructor. From 2007 to 2017, he also facilitated the Career Technical Education 

(CTE) Pathway program, which helped students find job-shadowing and internship 

opportunities in public service. 

18. 

Respondent was well-respected by colleagues and students alike. 

Because of his background, he was able to communicate and relate well with students, 

especially students who struggled with school, home, and other life challenges. Other 

6

than the subject incident, his performance evaluations and feedback were always very 

positive. 

September 12, 2017 

19. 

Respondent was teaching his honors class during second period. Toward 

the middle of class, while the students were studying on their own, the assistant 

principal entered the classroom with a new student for independent study. The 

assistant principal handed respondent the new student’s paperwork, so that it would 

be completed by the time independent study began after school. Respondent 

accepted the paperwork. He then requested CSM Melai to watch his classroom so he 

could run the paperwork over to the career center. 

20. 

After meeting with Ms. Ernest, respondent entered the stairwell and ran 

into MC. She asked respondent about computer speakers for her classroom. MC had 

previously asked respondent to help her find some speakers, but he had not been able 

to locate any. Respondent told MC there was “one last place” he had not yet checked: 

the storage room, Room A302 on the third floor. 

21.  MC followed respondent to the third floor. At the time, respondent 

believed he had been away from his classroom “one to two minutes”; he did not think 

it would take more than “three or four minutes” to look for the speakers. Once on the 

third floor, he tried to open the entry door to Room A302, but it was locked and 

barricaded. He unlocked and entered Room A301, and unlocked the connecting door 

to Room A302. Respondent quickly scanned Room A302 for the speakers, but found 

none. Respondent and MC then entered the room and began looking through boxes 

for speakers. Respondent turned around and “bumped into” MC, who was standing in 

close proximity to him. MC leaned in toward respondent. Respondent kissed her and 

7

MC kissed him back. MC placed her hands on respondent and things “escalated.” MC 

said something to respondent,5 respondent agreed, then MC began to perform oral 

sex on him. After 90 seconds to two minutes, respondent realized what they were 

doing was “not ok,” and he told MC, “no, no, no --- stop!”

22. 

Respondent denied that he then masturbated or ejaculated in front of 

MC asserting, “that is disgusting behavior, it absolutely did not happen whatsoever.” 

While he conceded his actions were wrong, he found the allegation he masturbated 

particularly offensive and it likened him to a “callous brazen animal.” Rather, 

respondent claimed that after MC stopped performing oral sex, he attempted to clean 

her saliva from his groin area using a piece of binder paper he found. After wiping his 

hands and groin, he crumpled up the paper and placed it in his pants pocket. 

Although respondent can be seen laughing on the video, he described himself as 

being in a “state of shock.” After he and MC left Room A302, respondent threw away 

the crumpled up paper in the men’s restroom waste bin and washed his hands. He 

sent a text message to his wife that they needed to talk. He then returned to his 

classroom. 

23. 

At the time, respondent had “no idea” that Student CT was present in 

Room A302 and witnessed the sexual encounter. He did not expect any student to be 

present in a dark storage room, which had a barricaded entry door, and required 

unlocking two other doors to gain access. 

24. 

After second period finished, respondent went to lunch and tried to 

compose himself. At the end of the lunch period, Student CT approached respondent, 

5 Respondent did not recall what MC had said.

 

8

pulled up a chair, and sat down. Respondent was familiar with the student; he had 

provided him food on previous occasions. Student CT asked respondent “how’s your 

day going,” then informed him of the video of the sexual encounter with MC. Student 

CT demanded respondent pay him $250 to erase the video or he would show the 

video to the administration. Respondent was “in shock.” He walked out of the 

classroom and informed a CSM that Student CT had a video he needed to show to the 

administration. Respondent returned to his classroom to teach third period, and 

waited to get called to the office.

Post-Resignation 

25. 

After resigning in November 2018, respondent did not seek another 

teacher position immediately. He was in a “bad state of mind,” and did not believe he 

was mentally ready to carry out his teacher duties successfully. The following year was 

“extremely difficult.” He lost his house and all of his savings. He had to rebuild his 

relationship with his wife and sons.

26. 

By 2019, with the encouragement and support of his family and friends, 

respondent decided to return to teaching. His passion and desire were still there; 

teaching made him happy and gave him a daily purpose. He began applying for 

positions for the 2019/2020 school year.

27.

In November 2019, respondent authored a letter to the committee 

members for the Commission’s Division of Professional Practices, who were scheduled 

to review respondent’s matter at the February 2020 meeting. In his letter, respondent 

wrote:

As much as I think about that moment and decision, I 

cannot go back and make it right. I can only move forward 

9

promising my wife, children, friends and community that 

the man I was in that moment is not the man that I truly 

am. I am a family man, educator, caring and giving man of 

faith. I have never at any point in the school district's 

investigation denied my involvement or denied 

responsibility. I have admitted my lapse in judgment had 

emotional decision [

] to my wife, my school 

administration and my community. 

[¶] . . . [¶] 

I hope that the Committee of Credentials can view the 

totality of my career and the person who I am rather than 

only see me in this momentary lapse of judgment. I can be 

trusted as a professional and with students. If given the 

opportunity to continue this profession, I will not disappoint 

the Committee, my wife, my family or my students. I am a 

genuine, loving, honest, empathetic, selfless person that 

loves his family, friends, and career deeply. I am constantly 

helping others whether a friend or a stranger. I have made 

mistakes but learn from my mistakes so that I never make 

the same mistake twice. This is who I truly am as a person.

28.

Respondent was hired by the Lodi Unified School District, teaching at 

Delta Sierra Middle School for the 2019-2020 and 2020-2021 school years. He teaches 

seventh grade world history, serves as the department chair for social sciences, and 

also coordinates the after-school tutoring program. He is well-liked by staff and 

10 

students alike. A few days prior to hearing, he was offered a contract for the 2021-

2022 school year. 

29. 

Respondent believes he is an “effective teacher today,” even more so 

than in 2017. He explained that, in the fall of 2017, he was “caught up on” himself, was 

behind in his master’s program, had personal turmoil including the death of three 

friends, and was not communicating with his wife. He has since learned that 

communication and seeking help when needed is paramount. This entire experience 

has made him a better educator. He has become more cognizant of his duties, 

expectations and role. He is “hyper-vigilant” with professionalism and does not 

socialize with colleagues outside of school. At the end of the day, he goes home, 

grades papers, and plans his lessons. While in-session, he does not leave his classroom 

for any reason, even for school-related matters. 

30. 

At hearing, respondent described his experience teaching middle school 

as “amazing but bittersweet,” given the possibility his credential will be revoked 

preventing his return. He enjoys teaching “every single day” and finds it “extremely 

rewarding” to help middle schoolers develop the confidence and academic skills they 

will need to be ready for high school. He knows he serves as a role model for his 

current students. He is a moral and good person, and one moment of poor judgment 

does not define him. Regardless of the outcome, respondent is determined to 

continue to find a way to help young people succeed – as a teacher or in some other 

capacity. 

CHARACTER EVIDENCE 

31. 

Respondent called seven character witnesses to testify on his behalf. The 

witnesses are current and former colleagues, friends, and his current school’s principal. 

11 

32.

Thomas “Mike” Areida has worked at Cesar Chavez High School since the 

2008/2009 school year. From 2008/2009 to 2013/2014, he taught in the History 

Department. Presently, he serves full-time as the Student Activities Director, 

coordinating student leadership and student government. He has known respondent 

since 2008/2009, and has observed him in the classroom several times. Mr. Areida 

lauded respondent as an “excellent teacher” who cares about his students and 

“belongs in the classroom.” Mr. Areida is also a minister and runs a non-profit ministry. 

He has remained in touch with respondent over the last three years. Although 

respondent is not involved in the ministry, his sons participate. Mr. Areida learned 

about respondent’s behavior from another teacher and has talked about it with 

respondent. He noted that respondent was devasted by his actions, and how it 

affected him, his family, and his friends. Mr. Areida does not disregard respondent’s 

mistake, but believes he should be allowed to continue teaching and continue to make 

a positive impact on young people’s lives. 

33. 

Patricia Rivera, Lisa Reese, and Shane Gruno are all teachers at Cesar 

Chavez High School and worked with respondent during his tenure there. These 

colleagues generally praised respondent’s ability to reach and connect with students, 

his dynamic teaching style, and his advocacy for students. These teachers are aware of 

some of the conduct leading to respondent’s resignation. However, some were 

unaware the incident occurred while respondent was supposed to be in-session, or 

that a student had witnessed the encounter. Nonetheless, those facts did not change 

their opinion of respondent. 

34. 

James Binder is a CSM at Cesar Chavez High School and worked 

alongside respondent. He sometimes supervised respondent’s classroom when 

respondent needed to step away momentarily. Mr. Binder described respondent as a 

12 

“stand-up guy” who served as a mentor for his students. He learned of the details 

leading to respondent’s resignation through rumors on campus, and later discussed it 

with respondent. None of it changed his opinion of respondent. 

35. 

Jason Velo is the Assistant Director of Curriculum and Instruction at ABLE 

Charter School (ABLE) in Stockton. He was previously a department head and sat on 

many hiring panels for teachers. He first met respondent when respondent interviewed 

for a position with the school for the 2018/2019 school year. During the interview, 

respondent disclosed the incident which led to his resignation from Stockton USD. 

Respondent was also required to conduct an in-person demonstrative lesson. He 

performed very well, exhibiting strong competencies. ABLE would have offered 

respondent a teaching position but for the uncertainty surrounding his future 

credential status. If respondent is allowed to maintain his credential, Mr. Velo noted 

ABLE would still be interested in hiring him. Since the interview, Mr. Velo has stayed in 

contact with respondent, and forwarded him job postings from time to time. 

36. 

Brad Watson is the principal at Delta Sierra Middle School, and sat on the 

hiring panel that interviewed respondent. Mr. Watson noted that during the interview 

respondent “came across well,” discussed his ability to connect with students, and 

offered specific details about how he could help students. Mr. Watson observed 

respondent in the classroom several times during the 2019/2020 school year, and 

described him as a “dynamic teacher” who is “very patient” and connects well with 

students. When the pandemic hit and the school transitioned to distance learning, 

respondent did not “miss a beat from the online format to what he did in person.” 

Respondent did not disclose the reason for his resignation from Stockton USD 

at the interview or before he was hired by Lodi USD. However, he later told Mr. 

Watson that there was an incident at his old school involving misconduct with another 

13 

employee on campus which resulted in his resignation. Respondent appeared very 

remorseful and did not want his past to tarnish his reputation at the middle school.

Mr. Watson did not seek further details and his impression of respondent as an 

educator did not change.

At hearing, Mr. Watson learned the specific details of respondent’s conduct for 

the first time including: respondent engaged in sexual acts on campus during school 

hours; at the same time, respondent’s class was in-session; and, a student had 

witnessed the encounter and recorded it with his cellular phone. Mr. Watson expressed 

surprise and appeared visibly disturbed by the information. He agreed it is never 

appropriate to engage in oral sex at school, and that doing so on campus during 

school hours did not reflect good moral values. 

Analysis 

37. 

It is undisputed that respondent engaged in sexual acts with another 

teacher on campus while he was scheduled to be teaching an in-session class. It is also 

undisputed that the encounter was witnessed and recorded by Student CT. There was 

insufficient evidence to establish the additional allegations that respondent 

masturbated or ejaculated in front of MC, or that he disposed of a piece of soiled 

binder paper in the storage room’s waste bin. However, the lack of evidence 

establishing the latter allegations does not lessen or detract from the seriousness of 

the undisputed misconduct.

38.

Equally serious is respondent’s decision to engage in such conduct while 

his class was still in-session. While teachers are generally permitted to step away from 

their classrooms briefly, with appropriate coverage, to use the restroom or perform 

discrete administrative tasks, respondent exercised extremely poor judgment after 

14 

leaving his class for an extended period of time. Even if it was appropriate and 

necessary to see Ms. Ernest, at that time, to discuss a new independent study student, 

respondent could not explain why it was more important to help MC look for speakers

than returning to his classroom.

39. 

Respondent repeatedly made poor decisions on September 12, 2017. 

First, he decided it was acceptable to leave his in-session class for an extended period. 

He testified it took him less than “one minute” to walk to the second floor of the 

administration building and talk to Ms. Ernest, and that he had estimated it would take 

another “two or three” minutes to help MC look for speakers, meaning he would have 

been away from class for no more than “three or four minutes.” Assuming this 

estimate was reliable at the time, respondent was delayed when the door to Room 

A302 was locked and he had to unlock Room A301 to access A302. He was further 

delayed when a quick visual scan of the room did not reveal the presence of any 

speakers. He then decided to enter the storage room and look through boxes to find 

them. At this point, his absence from the classroom was far greater than five minutes. 

While it is unknown how long that entire encounter lasted, the video recording was 

three minutes long and did not include respondent cleaning himself, leaving the room, 

going to the men’s restroom to wash up, and walking back to his classroom. Second, 

respondent decided to engage in a non-critical, non-time sensitive hunt for speakers, 

when he should have gone back to his classroom. Third, respondent decided to 

engage in a sex act on campus during schooltime. 

40. 

In mitigation, the evidence clearly established that, prior to the incident, 

and at his current position, respondent has enjoyed a reputation of being an excellent 

educator with a passion for teaching and the ability to connect and relate to students, 

making him a role model and mentor. At hearing, respondent expressed sincere 

15 

remorse for his misconduct, as well as the negative effects it has had on his career, 

family and friends. 

41.  Notwithstanding the above, respondent failed to demonstrate he had 

fully accepted responsibility for his actions. (

(1989) 49 Cal.3d 933, 940 [“Fully acknowledging the 

wrongfulness of his actions is an essential step towards rehabilitation”].) Rather, he 

attempted to lessen the severity of his wrongdoing by maligning Student CT’s 

reputation and the fact Student CT was not supposed to be in the room at that time. 

Respondent was also hyper-focused on the unproven allegations that he had 

masturbated and ejaculated in the room, claiming the District had portrayed him as an 

“callous brazen animal.” The existence or nonexistence of these facts does not lessen 

the seriousness or severity of the undisputed misconduct or establish that respondent 

as more or less moral. 

In addition, respondent’s testimony lacked perspective, insight, and credibility. 

Respondent seemed concerned primarily about what impact the incident had on him 

personally – losing his job, having to face his wife and children, losing his home and 

other financial burdens, and the possibility of losing his credential. He demonstrated 

little concern for how his actions affected the school, which had to scramble to replace 

two teachers six weeks into a new school year; his students whose curriculum and 

semester were disrupted, and for whom he previously served as a role model; or for 

Student CT who, regardless of whether or not he should have been present, ultimately 

witnessed the encounter. Toward the end of his testimony, respondent stated his 

regret that he could not apologize to Student CT. But given his earlier testimony and 

repeated attempts to malign Student CT’s character, respondent’s apologies came 

across as insincere and self-serving. 

16 

Finally, respondent was not forthcoming with his current employer about his 

past misconduct. While respondent disclosed generally that he had engaged in 

wrongdoing with another teacher on campus, he did not disclose all of the relevant 

details. The fact Mr. Watson did not request or want to hear the specific details is 

irrelevant. Accepting responsibility requires one to be honest and forthright. 

Respondent did not even disclose the full details to Mr. Watson prior to calling him as 

a witness and allowed Mr. Watson to learn the salient facts for the first time on cross-

examination. 

revoked. 

42. 

Given the above, and when the evidence is considered as a whole, 

complainant established that respondent engaged in unprofessional conduct, 

demonstrated evident unfitness for service, and engaged in acts involving moral 

turpitude. For the reasons set forth in the Legal Conclusions, his credential must be 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

In an administrative proceeding in which a licensing agency seeks the 

suspension or revocation of an existing, professional license, the standard of proof is 

clear and convincing proof to a reasonable certainty. (

(1982) 135 Cal.App.3d 583.) Clear and convincing evidence requires proof 

that is so clear as to leave no substantial doubt and that is sufficiently strong to 

command the unhesitating assent of every reasonable mind. (

 

(2008) 169 Cal.App.4th 176, 190.) 

2. 

The burden of proving the charges rests upon the party making the 

charges. (

(2008) 165 Cal.App.4th 1, 4.) 

17 

Therefore, complainant has the burden of establishing by clear and convincing 

evidence that grounds exist to impose administrative discipline against respondent’s 

teaching credential. 

Causes of Action

3.

Pursuant to the Education Code,6 commencing with section 44000, and 

California Code of Regulations, title 5, commencing with section 80000 (Regulation), 

the Commission is responsible for credentialing teachers in public schools in California, 

including issuing credentials and taking adverse action against applicants and 

credential holders. 

4. 

Section 44421 authorizes the Commission to take adverse action against 

a credential or certificate of one who has engaged in immoral or unprofessional 

conduct, persistently defied or refused to obey the laws regulating the duties of 

persons serving in the public school system, demonstrated evident unfitness for 

service or for any cause which would have warranted the denial of an application for, 

or a renewal of, a credential. 

5.

Section 44345, subdivision (e), provides that the Commission may deny 

any application for the issuance of a credential made by any applicant who falls under 

specified categories including one who has “committed any act involving moral 

turpitude.”

6 Unless noted, all further statutory references are to the Education Code.

 

18 

IMMORAL AND UNPROFESSIONAL CONDUCT

6.

Terms such as “immoral conduct” and “unprofessional conduct” are so 

general that they must be given meaning in relation to the particular profession 

involved. Although a teacher may have committed an immoral act, unless it indicates 

his unfitness to teach, it is not an appropriate basis for his discharge. (

(1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 220.) The determinative test of a charge of 

immoral or unprofessional conduct is fitness to teach, which is a question of ultimate 

fact. (

(1977) 10 Cal.3d 691.)

7. 

There is broad discretion in determining what constitutes unfitness to 

teach and immoral conduct, and in deciding whether the teacher should be 

sanctioned. (

(1999) 20 Cal.4th 327.) The 

proven conduct should be looked at in the aggregate. It is not necessary to determine 

if each and every act demonstrates unfitness; it is proper to examine the totality of the 

offensive conduct. “When the camel’s back is broken we need not weigh each straw in 

its load to see which one could have done the deed.” (

(1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1457.) 

8.

The term “immoral” has been defined generally as that which is willful, 

flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral indifference to the opinions of 

respectable members of the community, and as an inconsiderate attitude toward good 

order and the public welfare. (

 (1951) 36 Cal.2d 734, 

740.) The phrase “unprofessional conduct” is conduct such as to indicate unfitness to 

teach. (

 (1983) 149 Cal.App.3d 1167, 1174.) 

19 

UNFITNESS TO TEACH

9.

The criteria set forth in 

, are embodied in California Code 

of Regulations, title 5, section 80302 and itemize the factors to consider when 

evaluating the fitness of a teacher. These factors include the extent to which the 

conduct has adversely affected students, fellow teachers, or the educational 

community and the degree of impact; the proximity or remoteness in time of the 

conduct; the type of certificate held; the extenuating or aggravating circumstances 

surrounding the conduct; the praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives 

resulting in the conduct; the likelihood that the questioned conduct will recur; the 

extent to which adverse action may have a chilling effect upon the constitutional rights 

of the person involved or on other certificated persons; and the publicity or notoriety 

given to the conduct. These factors are relevant to the extent that they assist in 

determining the teacher’s fitness to teach, i.e., in determining whether the teacher’s 

future classroom performance and overall impact on his students are likely to meet 

(2010) 184 

professional standards. (

Cal.App.4th 462, 473-474.) 

10.

Applying the 

 factors here, respondent’s conduct adversely 

affected and impacted the school, its staff and students, and in particular, Student CT. 

Rumors and gossip swirled around campus for some time following respondent’s 

departure. His failure to accept full responsibility for his poor judgement and 

inappropriate behavior indicates a likelihood that such poor judgment would recur. 

The incident occurred more than three and a half years ago. There was no evidence of 

extenuating circumstances which would excuse respondent’s behavior, nor was there 

any evidence that respondent had a praiseworthy motive for his actions. Finally, taking 

disciplinary action against respondent would not inflict a chilling effect upon the 

20 

constitutional rights of respondent or other teachers. For all of these reasons, cause 

exists to discipline respondent’s teaching credential for immoral and unprofessional 

conduct pursuant to section 44421.

EVIDENT UNFITNESS FOR SERVICE

11.

“Evident unfitness for service” means clearly not fit, not adapted to, or 

unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of temperamental defects or 

inadequacies. Unlike “unprofessional conduct,” “evident unfitness for service” connotes 

a fixed character trait, presumably not remediable merely on receipt of notice that 

one’s conduct fails to meet professional standards. (

(1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444.) As 

discussed in Factual Findings 37 through 41, respondent’s conduct evidenced he lacks

the good judgment and fitness expected of a teacher. The fact he has yet to accept full 

responsibility for his actions indicates that notice of his failure to meet professional 

standards is insufficient. Accordingly, cause exists to discipline respondent’s teaching 

credential for evident unfitness for service pursuant to section 44421.

ORDER

Respondent George Joseph Maria’s Clear Single Subject Teaching Credential is 

hereby REVOKED.

DATE: May 3, 2021

TIFFANY L. KING

Administrative Law Judge

Office of Administrative Hearings

21

