BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Accusation and Statement of Issues 

Against: 

SHAMAWN LEE WRIGHT, Respondent 

Case No. 1-796939011 

OAH No. 2020030351 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Timothy J. Aspinwall, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative 

Hearings (OAH), State of California, heard this matter on May 26, 2020, in Sacramento, 

California. 

Joshua B. Eisenberg, Deputy Attorney General, represented complainant Mary 

Vixie Sandy, Ed.D. (complainant), Executive Director of the California Commission on 

Teacher Credentialing (Commission).

Shamawn Lee Wright (respondent) appeared on his own behalf.

Evidence was received and the record closed on May 29, 2020.1

FACTUAL FINDINGS

Background and Jurisdictional Matters 

1.

On August 4, 2016, the Commission issued respondent a Certificate of 

Clearance. The Certificate of Clearance was in full force and effect at all times relevant 

to the charges in the Accusation/Statement of Issues, and will expire on September 1, 

2021. 

2. 

On August 17, 2016, the Commission issued respondent a 30-Day 

Substitute Teaching Permit waiver. The Permit waiver was in full force and effect at all 

times relevant to the Accusation/Statement of Issues, and had an expiration date of 

August 17, 2017.2 

3. 

On December 7, 2017, respondent submitted an Application for 

Credential Authorizing Public School Service, seeking a Provisional Internship Permit 

(PIP). On November 13, 2018, the Commission rejected respondent’s application,

      

1 The record was held open until May 29, 2020, for respondent to submit 

documentary evidence. Respondent did not submit additional documents. 

2 Pursuant to Education Code section 44440, subdivision (b), the expiration or 

revocation of a credential shall not deprive the Commission of its authority to institute 

or continue disciplinary action. 

2 

because he had falsified scores for the California Basic Educational Skills Test (CBEST) 

and the California Subject Examinations for Teachers (CSET).

4. 

On December 7, 2018, respondent submitted an Application for 

Credential Authorizing Public School Service, seeking a PIP.3 The Commission denied 

respondent’s 2018 application based on his falsification of his CBEST and CSET scores. 

5. 

On January 21, 2020, complainant, acting in her official capacity, signed 

and thereafter filed the Accusation/Statement of Issues.4 Complainant seeks to deny 

3 The Accusation/Statement of Issues incorrectly states at paragraph 4 that 

      

respondent submitted the PIP application on November 7, 2018.

4 The Accusation/Statement of Issues was amended by interlineation at hearing,

without objection. More specifically, paragraph 3, at pages 1 and 2, was amended to 

state: 

On or about August 17, 2016, the Commission issued a 30-

day substitute Teaching Permit (Permit) waiver to 

respondent. The Permit waiver was in full force and effect at 

all times relevant to the charges brought herein and had an 

expiration date of August 17, 2017.

Additionally, paragraph 20, at page 6, was amended to include an additional 

sentence, as follows:

Respondent's December 7, 2018 Provisional Internship 

Permit application was reviewed at the March 13 through 

15, 2019 Commission meeting, where the Commission 

3 

respondent’s 2018 application for a PIP, and revoke all credentials, certificates, and 

authorizations issued to respondent, based on allegations that he falsified CBEST and 

CSET scores. 

6. 

Respondent timely filed a Notice of Defense. This hearing followed. 

Complainant’s Evidence

7.

Respondent submitted to the Commission an electronically falsified score 

for the September 2017 CBEST, in conjunction with his 2017 PIP application.

Specifically, respondent falsified the score report to indicate that he scored 42 on the 

writing test, when his actual score was 29.

8. 

Respondent submitted to National University electronically falsified 

scores for the April 2018 CSET. Specifically, respondent falsified the scores to indicate 

that he passed the Social Science I, II, and III Subtests. In fact, respondent failed the 

Social Science I Subtest in April 2018, and there is no record that he took the Social 

Science II or III Subtests in April 2018.

Respondent’s Evidence 

9.

Respondent submitted false CBEST and CSET scores, because he was 

afraid that he would lose his position as a long-term substitute teacher at a high 

school if he could not timely submit passing scores. Respondent very much wanted to 

continue teaching at the high school where he was also serving as a track and field 

      

recommended denial of respondent's application in light of 

respondent's falsification of CBEST and CSET scores. 

4 

coach and the head freshman football coach. Respondent readily admitted that his 

actions were wrong and dishonest.

10. 

After his misconduct came to light, respondent engaged in substantial 

self-reflection. He also underwent counseling to help process childhood traumas that 

have affected him as an adult. Based on his self-reflection and counseling, respondent 

feels committed to honesty, and testified that he will not engage in dishonest 

misconduct again.

11.

Respondent passed the CBEST in October 2018, and submitted his 

passing score with his 2018 PIP application. Respondent wants very much to work as a 

teacher. He has a particular bond with students from disadvantaged backgrounds, 

because he also had significant disadvantages as he grew up. Through hard work he 

was able to overcome his disadvantages, and wants to serve as a positive role model 

for students who are experiencing difficulties. 

12. 

Respondent is currently working toward a master’s degree in higher 

education at the University of San Francisco. He is also working as a football coach at 

another high school. 

Discussion 

13. 

In 

(1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, the California 

Supreme Court concluded that a teaching credential cannot be disciplined for immoral 

conduct, unprofessional conduct, or conduct involving moral turpitude “unless that 

conduct indicates that the [educator] is unfit to teach.” (

. at p. 229.) The Court 

outlined factors to consider when determining whether an educator’s conduct 

demonstrates unfitness to teach, which have been codified in California Code of 

Regulations, title 5, section 80302, subdivision (a). Those factors are: (1) the likelihood 

5 

that the conduct may have adversely affected students or fellow teachers, and the 

degree of such adversity anticipated; (2) the proximity or remoteness in time of the 

conduct; (3) the types of credentials held or sought by the person involved; (4) any 

extenuating or aggravating circumstances surrounding the conduct; (5) the 

praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the conduct; (6) the 

likelihood of recurrence of the questioned conduct; (7) the extent to which disciplinary 

action may have an adverse impact or chilling effect upon the constitutional rights of 

the person involved, or other teachers; and (8) the publicity or notoriety given to the 

conduct. 

LIKELIHOOD OF ADVERSE EFFECTS ON STUDENTS OR FELLOW TEACHERS

14. 

Respondent’s falsification of test results demonstrated poor judgment 

and dishonesty, which provides a negative example for students. In addition, 

respondent sought to continue teaching with falsified test results, thus potentially 

compromising the quality of education he provided to students. The potential for 

adverse effects on students was significant.

PROXIMITY OR REMOTENESS IN TIME

15. 

Respondent’s falsification of his CBEST and CSET scores occurred in 2017 

and 2018, respectively. Respondent’s misconduct is more proximate than remote in 

time. 

TYPES OF CREDENTIALS HELD AND SOUGHT

16. 

Respondent holds a Certificate of Clearance and an expired 30-Day 

Substitute Teaching Permit waiver. He applied for a Provisional Internship Permit. The 

credentials that respondent holds and seeks require teaching competence. One of the 

6 

thresholds for ensuring teaching competence is a passing score on the required tests. 

Respondent attempted to circumvent this important measure by falsifying his test 

scores. 

EXTENUATING OR AGGRAVATING CIRCUMSTANCES

17.

Neither the Education Code nor the applicable regulations specify what 

constitutes “extenuating circumstances.” However, California Code of Regulations, title 

5, section 80300, subdivision (m), defines “mitigating factor” as “an event or 

circumstance which demonstrates that the public, school children and the profession 

would be adequately protected by a more lenient degree of adverse action or no 

adverse action whatsoever.” Respondent did not present mitigating evidence. 

18. 

California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80300, subdivision (b), lists 

aggravating factors, the presence of which indicate a greater degree of discipline is 

necessary to protect students and the teaching profession. These factors include, in 

pertinent part, that (1) the misconduct in question involved multiple wrongful acts; and 

(2) the misconduct significantly harmed the educational system. Respondent’s 

misconduct involved multiple wrongful acts in that he falsified the scores for two 

separate examinations in 2017 and 2018. Respondent’s misconduct compromised the 

integrity of the educational system, which includes specific requirements for persons 

who aspire to the teaching profession. On balance, the aggravating circumstances 

outweigh the extenuating or mitigating circumstances.

PRAISEWORTHINESS OR BLAMEWORTHINESS OF MOTIVES RESULTING IN THE 

MISCONDUCT 

19. 

Respondent’s motives in falsifying his test scores were to preserve his job 

and continue teaching disadvantaged students. His motive to continue teaching 

7 

disadvantaged students is praiseworthy, as it displays a desire to improve society by 

helping students. Respondent’s motive to preserve his job was self-serving and 

blameworthy, especially given that he was willing to act dishonestly in pursuit of his 

self-interest. Based on these facts, respondent’s blameworthy motives outweigh his 

praiseworthy motives. 

LIKELIHOOD OF RECURRENCE 

20. 

Respondent is unlikely to repeat his misconduct of falsifying his exam 

scores, if for no other reason than that he achieved a passing score on the CBEST. 

Additionally, respondent engaged in substantial self-reflection and counseling 

following the disclosure of his misconduct, and testified that he is committed to 

honesty. However, respondent did not present any letters of support or witness 

testimony to corroborate his claim that he has learned from the experience and is now 

committed to honesty. For this reason, respondent did not present sufficient evidence 

to demonstrate that he is unlikely to engage in future dishonest conduct.

EXTENT TO WHICH DISCIPLINARY ACTION MAY INFLICT AN ADVERSE IMPACT 

OR CHILLING EFFECT ON CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS OF PERSONS INVOLVED OR 

OTHER TEACHERS

21. 

There is no evidence that discipline would adversely impact or chill 

respondent or any other teacher in the free exercise of their constitutional rights.

PUBLICITY OR NOTORIETY OF MISCONDUCT 

22.  No evidence was presented that respondent’s conduct was either 

publicized or notorious.

8 

Summary

23.

For the reasons stated above, and considering all the 

factors, 

complainant established by clear and convincing evidence that cause exists to 

discipline respondent. Based on the evidence as a whole, it would not be consistent 

with the public interest to allow respondent to retain his existing credentials or to 

grant him new credentials at this time. In the event that respondent wishes to re-apply, 

he should present a more complete set of rehabilitation evidence.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Complainant has the burden of proving the allegations in the Accusation 

by clear and convincing evidence to a reasonable certainty. (

 (1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035.) Clear and convincing evidence 

requires proof that is so clear as to leave no substantial doubt and that is sufficiently 

strong to command the unhesitating assent of every reasonable mind. (

(2008) 169 Cal.App.4th 176, 190.) 

2.

In response to the Statement of Issues, respondent has the burden of 

proving by a preponderance of the evidence that he is entitled to the credential he 

seeks. (

 (2000) 81 Cal.App.4th 1205; 

 

 (2006) 139 Cal.App.4th 471, 476.) 

Preponderance of the evidence means “more likely than not.” (

(2002) 94 Cal.App.4th 1378, 1388.) 

3. 

Pursuant to the Education Code, commencing with section 44000, and 

California Code of Regulations, title 5, commencing with section 80000 (Regulation), 

the Commission is responsible for credentialing teachers in public schools in California, 

9 

including issuing credentials and taking adverse action against applicants and 

credential holders. “Adverse action” is defined in Regulation 80300, subdivision (a), as 

“a denial, a private admonition, public reproval, suspension or a revocation of one or 

more credentials.”

4. 

Education Code section 44421 provides in part:  

The Commission on Teacher Credentialing shall privately 

admonish, publicly reprove, revoke or suspend for immoral 

or unprofessional conduct, or for persistent defiance of, and 

refusal to obey, the laws regulating the duties of persons 

serving in the public school system, or for any cause that 

would have warranted the denial of an application for a 

credential or the renewal thereof, or for evident unfitness 

for service. 

5. 

The California Supreme Court has recognized that the terms “immoral 

conduct” and “unprofessional conduct” substantially overlap one another, and conduct 

that constitutes one often includes the other. (

., 

, 1 

Cal.3d 214, 221, fn. 9.) “Unprofessional conduct” includes “‘that which violates the rules 

of ethical code of a profession or such conduct which is unbecoming a member of a 

profession in good standing.’” (

(1953) 41 Cal.2d 546, 553; quoting, 66 Corpus Juris, p. 55.) Additionally, in 

(2011) 194 

Cal.App.4th 1454, the court explained: 

Moreover, the definition of immoral or unprofessional 

conduct must be considered in conjunction with the unique 

10 

position of public school teachers, upon whom are imposed 

“responsibilities and limitations on freedom of action which 

do not exist in regard to other callings.” [Citation.] 

(

. at p. 1466.)

or inadequacies. (

6. 

“Evident unfitness for service” means a teacher is clearly not fit, not 

adapted to or unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of temperamental defects 

 (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444.) “Unlike ‘unprofessional 

conduct,’ ‘evident unfitness for service’ connotes a fixed character trait, presumably 

not remediable merely on receipt of notice that one’s conduct fails to meet the 

expectations of the employing school district.” (

)

Causes for Denial 

7. 

An application for a credential may be denied if the applicant “has 

committed any act involving moral turpitude” (Ed. Code, § 44345, subd. (e)), or 

“attempted to practice any material deception or fraud in his or her application” (Ed. 

Code, § 44345, subd. (g)). Complainant established by clear and convincing evidence 

that respondent committed acts of moral turpitude and attempted a material 

deception or fraud when he falsified and submitted CBEST and CSET scores. Cause 

therefore exists to deny respondent’s application pursuant to Education Code section 

44345, subdivisions (e) and (g).

Causes for Discipline 

8. 

The Commission may discipline a credential for unprofessional and 

immoral conduct, and for any cause that warrants the denial of an application. (Ed. 

11 

Code, § 44421.) Complainant established by clear and convincing evidence that 

respondent committed acts of unprofessional and immoral conduct when he falsified 

and submitted CBEST and CSET scores, and that such conduct involved moral 

turpitude. Cause therefore exists to discipline respondent’s credentials pursuant to 

Education Code section 44421. 

9. 

The Commission may discipline a credential for evident unfitness for 

service. (Ed. Code, § 44421.) As set forth in Legal Conclusion 6, “evident unfitness for 

service” connotes a fixed character trait. The evidence did not establish that 

respondent’s misconduct is attributable to a fixed character trait. For this reason, cause 

does not exist to discipline respondent based on “evident unfitness for service.” 

Respondent Shamawn Lee Wright’s application for a Provisional Internship 

Permit is DENIED.

Respondent Shamawn Lee Wright’s Certificate of Clearance and his expired 30-

Day Substitute Teaching Permit waiver are REVOKED.

DATE: June 22, 2020

TIMOTHY J. ASPINWALL

Administrative Law Judge

Office of Administrative Hearings

ORDER 

12 

