BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Petition to Revoke Probation Against: 

MICHELE SIMS, Respondent. 

Agency Case No. 1-170823567 

OAH No. 2021100360 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Carmen D. Snuggs-Spraggins, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ), Office of 

Administrative Hearings (OAH), State of California, heard this matter by 

videoconference on March 7, 2022. 

Complainant Mary Vixie Sandy, Ed.D. (Complainant), Executive Director of the 

California Commission on Teacher Credentialing (Commission) was represented by 

Stephen D. Svetich, Deputy Attorney General. 

Respondent Michele Sims (Respondent) did not appear at the hearing. After 

delaying the start of the hearing for a period of time, Complainant requested that the 

hearing proceed as a default Pursuant to Government Code section 11520. Having 

determined that Respondent was appropriately notified of the hearing pursuant to 

Government Code section 11509, the ALJ granted Complainant’s request. 

Oral and documentary evidence was received. The record was closed, and the 

matter was submitted for decision on March 7, 2022. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Jurisdictional and Procedural Matters 

1. 

On May 30, 1984, the Commission issued Life Multiple Subject Teaching 

Credential with an authorization in General Subjects (credential) to Respondent. The 

credential has no expiration. 

2. 

On March 21, 2018, Complainant filed an Accusation in in Case No. 1-

170823567, seeking the revocation of respondent’s teaching credential based upon 

four causes for discipline, namely: (1) unprofessional conduct, (2) immoral conduct, (3) 

evident unfitness for service, and (4) moral turpitude. 

The underlying factual allegations for each of the four causes of discipline were 

on April 30, 2014, Respondent was working as a substitute teacher to teach a fifth-

grade class at Fifty-Ninth Street Elementary School in Los Angeles, California. Teacher 

MB, whose class was across the hall from Respondent’s, asked Respondent to 

encourage teacher MB’s student LD to do his work. Respondent went to teacher MB’s 

class while teacher MB remained in Respondent’s class. Respondent initially spoke 

nicely to student LD, but when student LD refused to listen to Respondent, she began 

screaming at student LD and said, “Have you lost your mind?” “Have you gone to crazy 

land?”, or words to that effect. Respondent accused student LD of breaking pencils, 

which student LD denied. When the class laughed, Respondent said, “shut up” and told 

the class she should break student LD’s arms and legs because he was breaking 

pencils. 

2 

Respondent attempted to get student LD to leave the classroom with her. 

Student LD put his head on his desk and refused to leave with Respondent. 

Respondent pulled student LD off his chair. Student LD got under his desk, and 

Respondent pulled him by his pant leg. Student LD grabbed a desk leg and refused to 

let go, causing him to hit his head. Respondent left the classroom. When teacher MB 

returned to the classroom, student LD was still under the desk, and he was crying. 

Student LD would not come out from under the desk until Special Education Teacher 

RQ convinced student LD to do so and go with her. 

3. 

The Commission adopted a Decision and Order, effective September 9, 

2019, (Decision and Order) in Case No. 1-170823567, in which Respondent’s Life 

Multiple Subject Teaching Credential was revoked; however, the revocation was stayed 

for a period of three years with terms and conditions that included the following: 

Condition 3. Compliance with All Terms of Probation. 

Respondent shall fully comply with all the terms and 

conditions of this Order and cooperate with the 

Commission and [her] assigned probation compliance 

monitor (monitor) in the monitoring and investigation of 

Respondent's compliance with probation terms. 

Respondent shall participate in a telephone or in-person 

review of the probation terms with Respondent's assigned 

monitor. Respondent must participate in such review within 

14 calendar days after written request is mailed by the 

monitor. Failure to participate in the review of probation 

terms within the time stated above shall be considered a 

probation violation. 

3 

Respondent shall also respond to all requests made by the 

monitor, responding to written requests sent by mail within 

14 calendar days of the request, and within two business 

days after a telephone message or email request, unless a 

different time period is otherwise stated in this Order. 

Failure to respond within the time specified shall be 

considered a probation violation. 

Condition 12. Violation of Probation. If Respondent violates 

any term or condition of this Order, the Commission may 

refer the matter to the Attorney General's Office to file a 

Petition to Revoke Probation, and after giving Respondent 

notice and opportunity to be heard, may set aside the stay 

order and impose the stayed discipline. If during the period 

of probation, a Petition to Revoke Probation has been filed 

against Respondent's credential, or the Office of the 

Attorney has been asked to prepare a Petition to Revoke 

Probation against Respondent's credential, the probationary 

period shall automatically be extended and shall not expire 

until final action is taken on the Petition by the Commission. 

4. 

On October 8, 2019, Respondent filed a Petition for Writ of Mandamus in 

the Superior Court of California, County of Los Angeles, Case No. 19STCP04362, 

challenging the Commission’s Decision and Order. On March 5, 2020, Respondent filed 

a First Amended Petition for Writ of Mandate. On August 25, 2021, the court issued a 

Minute Order denying Respondent’s petition for writ of mandamus against the 

4 

Commission, and on September 10, 2021, entered judgment against Respondent and 

in favor of the Commission. 

5. 

There is no evidence the Decision and Order was stayed pending the 

resolution of the Superior Court matter. 

6. 

On January 20, 2020, Petitioner filed a Petition to Revoke Probation 

seeking to revoke the Decision and Order and reinstate the previously stayed 

revocation of Respondent’s teaching credential. The petition alleged one cause to 

revoke probation based upon the allegation that Respondent violated probation by 

failing to comply with all terms of probation as required by condition number 3. 

7. 

Respondent timely filed a notice of defense, and this hearing followed. 

Declaration of Commission Investigator 

8. 

The Declaration of Kristina McKinney, an Investigator with the 

Commission working in the Division of Professional Practices, was received into 

evidence pursuant to Government Code section 11514. The declaration was signed on 

October 17, 2019, under the penalty of perjury that it is true and correct. Investigator 

McKinney wrote that her duties in her position include probation compliance 

monitoring. Ms. McKinney further wrote in her declaration as follows: 

[¶] . . . [¶] 

3. 

On September 30, 2019, I called Respondent to set 

up her probation orientation. Respondent refused to set up 

the probation orientation with me. (Citation omitted). 

5 

4. 

On October 1, 2019, I mailed Respondent an 

orientation packet, via certified mail, with a cover letter 

indicating she had to contact me on or before October 15, 

2019, to set up her probation orientation or she would be in 

violation of her probation [citations omitted]. Respondent 

did not contact me. 

5. 

On October 4, 2019, I called and left Respondent a 

voicemail requesting that she contact me [citations 

omitted]. Respondent did not contact me. 

6. 

On October 10, 2019, the Commission received a 

certified mail receipt, with signature, that Respondent’s 

probation packet was delivered [citations omitted]. 

7. 

On October 17, 2019, I went to the USPS Tracking 

website and entered the tracking number associated with 

Respondent’s probation packet in the search bar, and 

according to the USPS Tracking website, Respondents 

probation packed was delivered on October 4, 2019 at 1637 

hours, and was left with an individual at Respondent’s 

address of record [citations omitted]. 

(Ex. 6, pp. A86-87.) 

Hearing Testimony 

9. 

Deidra Waggoner is a Special Investigator with the Commission. Her 

duties include serving as a compliance monitor for credential holders on probation. On 

6 

September 2, 2021, Investigator Waggoner was assigned to act as Respondent’s 

probation compliance monitor and has served in that capacity since that date. 

10. 

After reviewing Respondent’s file, Investigator Waggoner discovered 

Respondent was not compliant with the probation condition requiring Respondent to 

submit quarterly compliance reports. In fact, Respondent had not submitted any 

quarterly compliance reports to the Commission. 

11. 

Investigator Waggoner explained that during an orientation meeting, the 

probation monitor reviews the probationer’s decision and order and probation 

requirements and sets expectations regarding the probationer’s conduct. Investigator 

Waggoner’s review of Respondent’s file revealed that Investigator McKinney contacted 

Respondent on September 30, 2019 to set up orientation meeting and that the 

orientation packet sent to Respondent contained 12 blank quarterly reports for 

submission by Respondent. 

12.  On September 3, 2021, Investigator Waggoner contacted Respondent by 

telephone in an attempt to assist Respondent achieve compliance with her 

probationary terms and to ensure Respondent received the quarterly reports sent with 

the orientation packet. Investigator Waggoner spoke to Respondent that date. 

Respondent asked whether she could call Investigator Waggoner back. Investigator 

Waggoner gave Respondent a deadline of September 9, 2021, to contact her. 

Respondent did not call Investigator Waggoner by the deadline. On September 9, 

2021, Investigator Waggoner called Respondent and left a message requesting a 

return telephone call. Respondent did not return the call and had not called 

Investigator Waggoner as of the date of hearing. 

7 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

Burden and Standard of Proof 

1. 

Petitioner has the burden of proving each of the causes to revoke 

probation alleged in the Petition to Revoke Probation, and must do so by a 

preponderance of the evidence. (

 (2012) 209 Cal.App.4th 445, 454 [“‘While the board is 

required to prove the allegations in an accusation by clear and convincing evidence, it 

is only required to prove the allegations in a petition to revoke probation by a 

preponderance of the evidence’ [citation]”]; quoting 

(2010) 184 Cal.App.4th 1434, 1441.) Evidence deemed to preponderate must amount 

to “substantial evidence.” (

 (1984) 152 Cal.App.3d 775, 783.) 

And to be “substantial,” evidence must be reasonable in nature, credible, and of solid 

value. (

 (1952) 112 Cal.App.2d 638, 644.) 

Applicable Statutes and Regulations 

2. 

Under Education Code section 44000 et seq., and California Code of 

Regulations, title 5, section 80000 et seq., the Commission is responsible for 

credentialing teachers in public schools in California, including issuing credentials and 

taking adverse action against applicants and credential holders. “Adverse action” 

includes the suspension or revocation of a credential. (Ed. Code, § 44000.5, Cal. Code 

Regs., tit. 5, § 80300, subd. (a).) 

Cause Exists to Revoke Probation 

3. 

Condition 12 of Respondent’s probation provides that if Respondent 

violates any probationary term, after notice and opportunity to be heard, the 

8 

 
Commission may set aside the stay order and impose the stayed discipline of 

revocation. 

4. 

Cause exists to revoke Respondent’s probation, pursuant to Condition 

number 9 of the Decision and Order and Education Code section 44000 et seq., in that 

Respondent violated Condition number 3 by failing to: a) cooperate with her assigned 

probation compliance monitor; b) participate in a telephone or in-person review of the 

probation terms with Respondent’s assigned monitors within 14 days after written 

request is mailed by the monitors; and c) respond to all written requests made by the 

monitors by mail within14 calendar days of the requests, and by the deadlines set by 

Investigators McKinney and Waggoner after their telephone messages. 

Evaluation 

5. 

A preponderance of the evidence established that Respondent failed 

cooperate with Investigators McKinney and Waggoner and to comply with any of the 

probation terms contained in the Decision and Order. 

6. 

Respondent failed to appear at the hearing and presented no evidence in 

explanation or mitigation. Accordingly, public protection requires revocation of 

Respondent’s teaching credential. Based on the foregoing, Respondent’s probation 

shall be revoked, the stay on the disciplinary order imposed by the Decision and Order 

shall be lifted, and Respondent’s credential shall be revoked. 

/// 

/// 

/// 

9 

ORDER

The Petition to Revoke Probation Against Michele Sims is granted. The 

probation that was granted by the California Commission on Teacher Credentialing in 

Case No. 1-170823567 is revoked, and the stay on the disciplinary order that was 

imposed is lifted. The Life Multiple Subject Teaching Credential issued to Michele Sims

is revoked.

DATE:

CARMEN D. SNUGGS-SPRAGGINS

Administrative Law Judge

Office of Administrative Hearings

10

