BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Accusation Against: 

ANTHONY MARCHMANN SMITH, Respondent. 

Agency Case No. 2-90147671 

OAH No. 2021080920 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Administrative Law Judge Traci C. Belmore, State of California, Office of 

Administrative Hearings, heard this matter on February 1 and 2, 2022, via 

videoconference. 

Deputy Attorney General Leslie E. Brast represented complainant Mary Vixie 

Sandy, Ed.D., Executive Director of the Commission on Teacher Credentialing.

Attorney Kena Cador represented respondent Anthony Marchmann Smith, who 

was present at hearing. 

The record closed and the matter was submitted for decision on February 2, 

2022. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

The Commission on Teacher Credentialing (Commission) issued the 

following credentials1 to respondent Anthony Marchmann Smith:

  Certificate of Clearance issued May 13, 2019. The certificate will expire on 

June 1, 2024, unless renewed.

  Pupil Personnel Services credential originally issued on May 19, 2004. The 

credential was in full force and effect at all times relevant to this proceeding. 

The credential will expire on June 1, 2024, unless renewed.

  Adult Education Teaching credential issued on May 30, 2019. This credential 

will expire on June 1, 2022, unless renewed. 

  Multiple Subject Teaching Permit issued on June 30, 1999. The permit 

expired on September 1, 2003.

  Pre-Intern Certificate issued on July 1, 2000. The certificate expired on 

August 1, 2002.

Certificate of Clearance issued on November 25, 1997. The certificate expired 

on December 1, 2002.

1 Education Code section 44002 defines “credential” as a credential, certificate, 

life document, life diploma, permit, certificate of clearance, or waiver issued by the 

Commission.

2

 
2.

Respondent was employed by the San Francisco Unified School District 

(SFUSD) between 1998 and 2004, first as an elementary school teacher and later as a 

high school counselor. 

3. 

On May 3, 2004, respondent received a performance evaluation from 

SFUSD. The evaluation rated his work performance as unsatisfactory and described his 

conduct as lacking in honesty, integrity, and credibility, stating that respondent 

“attempts to cover up his mistakes” and “makes excuses rather than accept 

responsibility.” 

4. 

Respondent was employed as a high school counselor by the Berkeley 

Unified School District (BUSD) between 2004 and 2015.

5. 

The Commission suspended respondent’s certificates and credentials for 

seven days effective September 15, 2012. The circumstances underlying the 

suspension are that respondent engaged in inappropriate behavior with a female 

student during the 2009-2010 school year. 

6. 

In April 2015, BUSD placed respondent on paid administrative leave while 

an investigation into his alleged misconduct occurred. In May 2015, BUSD notified 

respondent of its intent to terminate him. Respondent reached a settlement 

agreement with BUSD that allowed him to resign in lieu of termination. 

7. 

On August 13, 2019, respondent was again hired by SFUSD. It came to 

the district’s attention that one or more answers in respondent’s employment 

application were not true. 

8. 

On October 23, 2019, SFUSD placed respondent on paid administrative 

leave, pending an investigation into allegations of misconduct. SFUSD scheduled an 

3

interview with respondent on November 1, 2019. Rather than participate in the 

interview, respondent resigned on November 1, 2019.

9. 

SFUSD notified the Commission of respondent’s resignation pending an 

investigation of an allegation of misconduct.

10. 

At its November 2020 meeting, the Committee of Credentials 

(Committee) recommended the suspension of respondent’s teaching credentials and 

all other certification documents for a period of 120 days. In a letter dated December 

3, 2020, the Committee notified respondent of the recommendation and advised him 

of his appeal rights. Respondent requested an administrative hearing. 

11.  On July 28, 2021, complainant Mary Vixie Sandy, Ed.D., in her official 

capacity as Executive Director of the Commission, filed an accusation alleging five 

causes for discipline and seeking to revoke all of respondent’s credentials, certificates 

and authorizations. Respondent filed a notice of defense and this hearing ensued. 

SFUSD Applications 

12. 

Respondent submitted three applications to SFUSD. In the “Legal 

Information” section of the application are the following questions:

a. 

Have you previously resigned or otherwise left any type of employment 

to avoid discipline or dismissal, or investigation for alleged misconduct? 

b. 

Have you previously resigned or otherwise left employment as the result 

of an allegation of misconduct or while an allegation of misconduct was pending? 

c. 

Have you ever been issued an evaluation of any kind that denotes less 

than satisfactory service while serving in any school or school district, public or private, 

4

including evaluations currently pending? *If you answered “Yes”, please explain; be 

sure to include dates and timelines if applicable.

d. 

Have you ever had a teaching or service credential, application, permit, 

license, or other authorization suspended, revoked, voided or denied, for any reason, 

or is any charge or other adverse action pending against any such credential or 

authorization, in California or elsewhere? *If you answered “Yes,” please explain; be 

sure to include dates and timelines if applicable.

e. 

Have you ever been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor, or do you 

currently have a felony or misdemeanor charge pending? Convictions include a plea of 

guilty, nolo contendere (no contest) and/or a finding of guilty by a judge or a jury. 

(NOTE: Exclude convictions for marijuana-related offenses more than two years old.)

13. 

The applications required respondent to certify that he had made “true, 

correct and complete answers and statements” in the applications. 

2015 APPLICATION

14. 

In an application dated April 24, 2015, respondent omitted his 

employment at BUSD in the employment section; denied that he had been convicted 

of a felony or misdemeanor; denied that he had ever resigned or otherwise left any 

type of employment to avoid investigation for alleged misconduct and/or dismissal;2 

admitted he had received a less than satisfactory evaluation and gave the explanation 

2 Prior to November 15, 2016, questions a and b had been combined into one 

question, “Have you previously resigned or otherwise left any type of employment to 

avoid investigation for alleged misconduct and/or dismissal?”

5

 
that “This {Needs Improvement] evaluation was given to me during the same year of 

the False accusation”; and admitted that his credentials had been suspended with an 

explanation stating, “My credential was suspended for [5] working days. I was falsely 

accused of giving a student a hug.” 

2016 APPLICATION

15. 

In an application dated February 23, 2016, respondent denied that he 

had been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor; denied that he had ever resigned or 

otherwise left any type of employment to avoid investigation for alleged misconduct 

and/or dismissal; denied he had ever received a less than satisfactory evaluation; and 

admitted his credential had been suspended with the explanation, “Suspended [5] 

working days for alleged misconduct; giving a student a hug…” Respondent did 

include his employment at BUSD in the employment section of the application but 

stated he left that employment due to “lack of support.” While this answer may have 

been true, it certainly was not a complete answer. 

2019 APPLICATION

16.

In an application dated June 11, 2019, respondent denied that he had 

been convicted of a felony, denied that he had previously resigned to avoid discipline

or dismissal for alleged misconduct, denied that he had resigned as the result of an 

allegation of misconduct or while an allegation of misconduct was pending; denied he 

had ever been given a less than satisfactory evaluation; and denied that his credentials 

had ever been suspended. Respondent stated he left his employment at BUSD because 

it was “time for a change.” Again, while this answer might have been true, it certainly 

was not a complete answer. 

6

2019 SFUSD Employment

17.

Respondent’s 2019 application resulted in an offer of employment from 

SFUSD to be Dean of Students at Lowell High School. Prior to commencing 

employment respondent was required to be fingerprinted so that a criminal history 

check could be performed. Respondent completed a conviction disclosure form that 

was submitted with his fingerprints. On that form, respondent stated he had not been 

convicted of any crime. The criminal history check from the California Department of 

Justice revealed a 1989 misdemeanor conviction. 

18. 

D’Andre Ball, the Director of Certificate Staffing at SFUSD, contacted 

respondent regarding the missing conviction information on respondent’s disclosure 

form. Ball requested that respondent send an explanation for the omission. Ball 

credibly testified that his only interaction with respondent was regarding the 

conviction disclosure form accompanying respondent’s fingerprints. Ball had no 

knowledge of respondent’s credential suspension. 

19.  On August 8, 2019, respondent sent an email to Ball stating, “I 

inadvertently failed to check the box regarding a prior disciplinary action….the 

omission was simply a mistake.” 

Respondent’s Evidence 

20. 

Respondent’s focus was almost exclusively on his 2019 application, and 

especially the question asking if his credentials had ever been suspended. Respondent 

testified that he had been advised of the position at Lowell High School by the 

principal, Andrew Ishibashi. Respondent stated that Ishibashi told him of the opening 

and advised respondent to apply the day before applications for the position were 

7

due. Respondent claimed he inadvertently answered the question negatively in his 

rush to complete and submit the application.

21. 

Respondent testified that he noticed the error and had spoken with an 

employee of the Human Resources department of SFUSD, Riley Collins, about the 

omission. 

22. 

Respondent testified that Ball left a voicemail message for respondent

regarding the suspension of his credentials. During a phone conversation, respondent 

claims that Ball told him to write something addressing the omission. Respondent 

claimed he asked Ball if this would be the last time that respondent would be required

to address the omission of the credential suspension in his application and Ball replied 

that it would be. 

23. 

Respondent acknowledged that he made a mistake in replying negatively 

to the question on his 2019 application regarding credential suspension. Respondent 

grudgingly admitted that the credential suspension was not the only question he 

answered incorrectly, but adamantly denied that he had intentionally answered the 

questions falsely. Respondent stated he had filled out the application hastily and that 

was why the incorrect answers were made. Respondent had no explanation for why the 

answers were incorrect on his 2015 and 2016 applications. Respondent’s explanation 

for the false answers on his 2019 application was not credible. 

24. 

Ishibashi wrote a letter and testified on behalf of respondent. Ishibashi 

considers respondent a colleague and friend. In his letter, Ishibashi stated respondent 

is a “genuine, honest, straight-forward and dedicated counselor.” During testimony, 

Ishibashi acknowledged that honesty is fundamental in both teaching and counseling. 

In both his letter and during his testimony, Ishibashi stated respondent told him the 

8

reason for this disciplinary proceeding was solely respondent’s failure to include his 

credential suspension on respondent’s 2019 application. 

25. 

Donald E. Evans, Ed.D., wrote a letter and testified on behalf of 

respondent. Dr. Evans was the Superintendent of BUSD for part of respondent’s tenure 

there. In his letter, Dr. Evans stated respondent was “a very good counselor,” “a 

champion for the students that felt underserved and marginalized,” and that 

respondent “would go above the call of duty to make students feel appreciated and 

welcomed.” During testimony, Dr. Evans agreed that honesty is a bedrock principle for 

educators. When asked if he would hire an applicant who had given those false 

answers on more than one application, Dr. Evans stated he would not. 

26. 

Respondent submitted several other reference letters. Vernon L. Walton 

Jr., Ed.D., a former co-worker, wrote that respondent was “a person of high integrity 

and honesty.” Dr. Walton stated respondent had told him he made errors on his 

application for SFUSD. Thelette Bennett, a former co-worker, wrote that respondent 

“brings an area of hope and belief to a district that is sorely deprived of both.” Steven 

Williams, a co-worker, wrote that respondent was “a person who passionately and 

genuinely cared for the health and well-being of students.” Shawn Parker, a friend, 

wrote that respondent is “professional, respectful, engaging, compassionate and 

extremely focused on his work.” Kimberly Fanady, respondent’s former attorney, wrote 

that respondent is a “good educator and a good person.” Jason Tarn, a co-worker, 

wrote that respondent has demonstrated “compassionate yet respectful student 

support.” Edith Jordan-McCormick, a friend and former colleague, wrote that 

respondent has “demonstrated the ability to effectively service students and their 

families.” Regina Caudillo, a former colleague, stated that respondent is a “strong and 

9

consistent teacher.” All the authors appeared to have knowledge of respondent’s 2019 

application only. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

The Commission is responsible for the credentialing of public school

teachers, including issuing credentials and taking adverse action against credential 

holders. (Ed. Code, § 44000 et seq; Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80001 et seq.)3 Adverse 

action includes the suspension or revocation of a credential. (§ 44000.5.)

Causes for Discipline 

2. 

Section 44421 authorizes the Commission to privately admonish, publicly 

reprove, revoke or suspend a credential for immoral or unprofessional conduct, or for 

persistent defiance of, and refusal to obey, the laws regulating the duties of persons 

serving in the public school system, or for any cause that would have warranted the 

denial of an application for a credential or the renewal thereof, or for evident unfitness 

for service.

3.

Unprofessional conduct is defined as conduct that, “violates the rules or 

ethical code of a profession or such conduct which is unbecoming a member of a 

profession in good standing.” (

(1953) 41 Cal.2d 546, 553 

[citation omitted], overruled, in part, on another ground in 

(1972) 6 Cal.3d 575, 588, fn. 7.) Respondent’s submission of false and 

3 All statutory references are to the Education Code, unless otherwise stated. 

10 

 
incomplete answers on three different applications constitutes unprofessional conduct. 

(Factual Findings 12-16.) Cause for discipline exists pursuant to section 44421. 

4. 

“The term ‘immoral’ has been defined generally as that which is hostile to 

the welfare of the general public and contrary to good morals.” (

(1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811 [citation omitted].) Respondent’s submission 

of false and incomplete answers on three different applications constitutes immoral 

conduct. (Factual Findings 12-16.) Cause for discipline exists pursuant to section 

44421. 

5. 

On three different occasions, respondent falsely and incompletely 

answered questions on an application that he certified were true and complete. 

Respondent’s repeated submission of false and incomplete answers demonstrates a 

persistent defiance of, and refusal to obey the laws regulating the duties of persons 

serving in the public school system. (Factual Findings 12-16.) Cause for discipline exists 

pursuant to section 44421.

6. 

Respondent’s lack of honesty in answering questions in those three 

applications and his lack of honesty in explaining the complete circumstances of his 

potential discipline to the individuals writing letters and testifying on his behalf 

demonstrates temperamental defects or inadequacies indicating an evident unfitness 

for service. (Factual Findings 12-16 and 24-26.) Cause for discipline exists pursuant to 

section 44421. 

7. 

Section 44345, subdivision (e), authorizes the Commission to deny an 

application for the issuance of a credential or for the renewal of a credential if the 

applicant has committed any act involving moral turpitude. Falsely answering 

questions on an application and then certifying that the answers were true and 

11 

complete is an act of moral turpitude. (Factual Findings 12-16.) Cause for discipline 

exists pursuant to sections 44421 and 44345, subdivision (e).

 Factors 

8. 

Pursuant to 

(1969), 1 Cal.3d 214, 

and California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80302, the Commission shall 

determine whether a teacher's conduct indicates such unfitness to teach as to warrant 

disciplinary action. That determination may be based upon factors that include, but are 

not limited to, the: (1) likelihood that the conduct may have adversely affected 

students, fellow teachers, or the educational community, and the degree of such 

adversity anticipated; (2) proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct; (3) type of 

credential held; (4) extenuating or aggravating circumstances surrounding the 

conduct; (5) praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the 

conduct; (6) likelihood of recurrence of the conduct; (7) the extent to which disciplinary 

action may inflict an adverse impact or chilling effect upon the constitutional rights of 

the person involved or other certified persons; and (8) the publicity or notoriety given 

to the conduct (

 factors). 

9.

While respondent’s misconduct is not likely to directly affect any student, 

the conduct decidedly affects respondent’s fellow teachers and the educational 

community. Fraud in connection with an application for employment impugns the 

integrity of teachers and the entire educational community.

10. 

Respondent’s most recent misconduct occurred less than three years 

ago. (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80302, subd. (a)(2).)

11. 

Respondent held a clear pupil personnel services credential, a preliminary 

three-year adult education teaching credential, a certificate of clearance, an 

12 

emergency long-term multiple subject teaching permit, and a pre-intern certificate.

(Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80302, subd. (a)(3).) 

12. 

The fourth 

factor examines the extenuating or aggravating 

circumstances surrounding the conduct. (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80302, subd. (a)(4).) 

Aggravating and mitigating factors are to be considered in determining the degree of

discipline. (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80300.) “Aggravating factors” are circumstances 

demonstrating that a greater degree of adverse action is needed to adequately protect 

the public, schoolchildren, or the profession. (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80300, subd. (b).)

Respondent has a prior record of adverse action. (Factual Finding 6.) (Cal. Code 

Regs., tit. 5, § 80300, subd. (b)(1).) Respondent’s submission of false answers occurred 

on three different applications spanning four years and establishes multiple acts of 

wrongdoing and a pattern of misconduct. (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80300, subd. (b)(2).) 

Subsequently, respondent was not candid to the Committee about his behavior. (Cal. 

Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80300, subd. (b)(3).) Respondent demonstrated indifference toward 

the consequence of his misconduct. (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80300, subd. (b)(5).) 

Respondent had prior notice from a reliable source regarding his honesty. (Factual 

Finding 3.) (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80300, subd. (b)(6).) 

13. 

“Mitigating factors” are circumstances demonstrating that the public, 

schoolchildren, and the profession would be adequately protected by a more lenient 

degree of adverse action. (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80300, subd. (m).) Potential 

mitigating factors include: (1) absence of any prior record of adverse action over many 

years of educational service, coupled with present misconduct which is not deemed 

most serious; (2) lack of harm to the person who is the object of the misconduct; (3) 

emotional or physical difficulties suffered by the holder which substantially 

contributed to the misconduct, provided that the difficulties were not the product of 

13 

illegal conduct such as illegal substance abuse, and further provided that the holder 

has established through clear and convincing evidence that he or she no longer has 

such difficulties; (4) attestations to the holder’s good character by individuals from the 

educational or general community who are aware of the extent of the holder’s 

misconduct; (5) objective action by the holder, spontaneously demonstrating remorse 

at the time of the misconduct, and recognition of the wrongdoing designed to timely 

make amends; (6) proximity or remoteness in time of the misconduct relative to the 

seriousness of the misconduct; and (7) the nature and extent of subsequent 

rehabilitation. (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80300, subd. (m).) 

14. 

Respondent provided several attestations to his good character. 

However, it was not clear that the individuals providing the attestations were aware of 

the full extent of respondent’s misconduct. Respondent did not admit any 

wrongdoing, insisting that haste made him mistakenly answer the questions 

incorrectly. Even were that true of the 2019 application, respondent had no 

explanation for the false answers submitted in his 2015 and 2016 applications. 

15. 

Respondent’s motive for submitting the fraudulent answers appears to 

have been to pass the initial screening so that he could obtain the position at Lowell 

High School, which is blameworthy. (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80302, subd. (a)(5).) 

16. 

At hearing, respondent continued to insist that his false answers were 

due to haste and not an attempt to mislead anyone. The fact that his false answers 

occurred on three different applications in a four-year period and his refusal to 

acknowledge his dishonesty make it likely that his misconduct will recur. (Cal. Code 

Regs., tit. 5, § 80302, subd. (a)(6).) 

14 

17.

Disciplinary action against respondent would not inflict an adverse 

impact or chilling effect on respondent or others, because there is no constitutionally 

protected speech or behavior involved. (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80302, subd. (a)(7).) 

18. 

There is no evidence that respondent’s misconduct received any publicity 

or notoriety. (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80302, subd. (a)(8).) 

19. 

Upon consideration of the 

factors, it is established that 

respondent’s misconduct was related to his fitness, competence, and ability to 

discharge the duties authorized by his credentials. 

Determination of Discipline 

20.  Having established cause for discipline of respondent’s credentials, the 

issue is what level of discipline is necessary for protection of the public, students, and 

the profession. Honesty is a bedrock principle for teachers, who serve as role models. 

Teachers must be trusted by other teachers, principals, and parents to be honest in all 

their communications.  

This matter involves a series of dishonest communications by respondent. He 

was dishonest with SFUSD on three different occasions by submitting false answers on 

his applications for employment. He was dishonest with the Committee by saying he 

had made a single mistake on his 2019 application. Under these circumstances, 

protection of the public, students, and the profession requires revocation of 

respondent’s credentials.

15 

ORDER

All credentials issued to respondent Anthony Marchmann Smith are hereby 

revoked.

DATE:

TRACI C. BELMORE

Administrative Law Judge

Office of Administrative Hearings

16

