BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Statement of Issues Against: 

CHARLES DROUAILLET, Respondent 

Case No. I-992849425 

OAH No. 2021070560 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Jami A. Teagle-Burgos, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative 

Hearings, State of California, heard this matter on January 20, 2022, remotely utilizing 

the Microsoft Teams application. 

Michael M. Karimi, Deputy Attorney General, Department of Justice, State of 

California, represented complainant, Mary Dixie Sandy, Ed.D., Executive Director, 

California Commission on Teacher Credentialing (Commission). 

Charles Drouaillet, respondent, represented himself. 

Oral and documentary evidence was received. The record was closed and the 

matter was submitted for decision on January 20, 2022. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Background 

1. 

The Commission is responsible for the credentialing of public school 

teachers, including issuing credentials and taking adverse action1 against applicants 

and credential holders. 

2. 

On October 16, 2018

for a Career Technical Education Teaching Credential. Respondent disclosed that he 

had suffered a misdemeanor conviction for alcohol-related reckless driving (Veh. Code, 

§ 23103.5), and a misdemeanor conviction for dissuading a witness (Pen. Code, § 136.1, 

subd. (b)(2)). 

3. 

At its September 16 through 18, 2020

Committee of Credentials (Committee) found probable cause to recommend the 

Committee 

sustain its 

previous action. Respondent requested an administrative hearing. 

November 18 through 20, 2020, meeting, the 

4. 

On May 20, 2021, complainant filed the statement of issues against 

respondent alleging that the conduct underlying his convictions constituted acts of 

1 

private admonition, or public reproval of a credential holder, or the suspension or 

revocation of a credential. (Ed. Code, § 44000.5.) 

2 

 
moral turpitude indicating unfitness to teach. Complainant requested the denial of 

. 

2016 Conviction for Wet Reckless 

5. 

On April 25, 2016, in the Superior Court of California, County of Los 

Angeles, in Case No. 5R105364, respondent was convicted following his plea of nolo 

contendere for violating Vehicle Code section 23103.5, alcohol-related reckless driving 

, a misdemeanor, which was added to the complaint by interlineation. 

The original charges of driving under the influence (DUI) and driving with an expired 

license were dismissed pursuant to a plea agreement. Respondent was placed on 36 

one day in county jail with a credit of 1 day for time served, pay fines and fees, and 

complete a three-month first offender alcohol program and the MADD Victim Impact 

a sentence of 

Program. 

6. 

wet and reckless conviction are found 

in a report prepared by the California Highway Patrol (CHP), which was admitted 

pursuant to 

 (1997) 16 Cal.4th 448.2 On September 26, 2015, officers 

2 In 

, the California Supreme Court concluded that direct observations 

1280, the public employee records exception to the hearsay rule, and were sufficient to 

support a factual finding. The court further concluded that admissions by a party 

memorialized in such a report were admissible under Evidence Code section 1220 and 

were sufficient to support a factual finding. Citing Government Code section 11513, 

the court held that other hearsay statements set forth in t

3 

 
observed a vehicle crossing over lanes and drifting into the right shoulder of the 

highway. During an enforcement stop, the officers detected a moderate odor of 

alcohol emitting from respondent who had bloodshot eyes and admitted to 

consuming three 12-ounce cans of beer before driving. A preliminary alcohol 

screening (PAS) 

0.096 and 0.098 percent. Respondent was arrested for DUI. 

2017 Conviction for Dissuading a Witness 

7. 

On June 19, 2017, in the Superior Court of California, County of Riverside, 

in Case No. RIM1608313, respondent was convicted following his guilty plea for 

violating Penal Code section 136.1, subdivision (b)(2), dissuading a witness, a 

misdemeanor. Respondent was ordered to pay a court operations assessment fee of 

$40, a conviction assessment fee of $30, and pay a restitution fine of $150. The 

conviction was expunged on September 19, 2019, pursuant to Penal Code section 

1203.4a, whereby the conviction was set aside, a plea of not guilty was entered, and 

the case was ordered dismissed. 

8. 

The only evidence submitted regarding the circumstances of 

conviction for dissuading a witness are found in a declaration prepared 

by Investigator Ronald Braasch 

, 

which was admitted pursuant to 

. Inv. Braasch

reported he 

was assigned to investigate a witness who was being dissuaded to change her account 

could be used to supplement or explain other evidence, but they were not sufficient, 

by themselves, to support a factual finding, unless the hearsay evidence would be 

admissible over objection in civil actions. 

4 

 
of a crime. The witness was the victim in the case. 

support of an arre

 not respondent. The 

suspect was 

adoptive father, since her birth, and he was being investigated 

for an allegation of sexual assault of the victim. Respondent 

. 

Due to the arrest of her adoptive father, the victim had been placed in the custody of 

respondent. The victim reported that respondent and her adoptive mother told her to 

tell her 

s, bi-polar, dreaming 

and hallucinating about being molested  Respondent brought her to speak with the 

defense attorney. However, the victim told the district attorney that she lied to the 

defense attorney. The victim also stated respondent would only let her 

house if she told a defense investigator 

and she was bi-polar but she told the truth, which was that she was molested by her 

adoptive father. 

9. 

testimony is summarized as follows: Respondent knows his 

father did something inappropriate with his adopted sister. He does not think his 

 His father was convicted 

of five counts of lewd acts upon a child under 14 years of age, and he is in prison. His 

adopted sister was adopted by their parents when she was two years old. When the 

allegations were made against his father, his adopted sister was placed in his custody, 

at her request. She was 16 or 17 years old when she lived with respondent. She was 

enrolled in an extended school program and respondent helped her with homework, 

provided her food and shelter, and she came to him for social and emotional support. 

They had a good relationship, but she never wanted to talk about the situation with 

their father, and he understood. At some point, his adopted sister told him she wanted 

5 

 
 
to speak with 

. . . I was hanging on this rollercoaster . . . so when she said she wanted to talk to our 

and his ado

his entire family, 

 He told 

 He thought it 

was reasonable that he had questioned some of her details of the allegations because 

she had been hanging 

with cigarettes, blunts, and pills. When it came time for the trial, his adopted sister told 

the district attorney that he and his mother 

 and this is something 

that he regrets. The pain of his adopted sister tears him up every day. The whole 

situation was traumatic for him and he got caught up. 

10. 

Respondent has custody of his daughter and he raised her on his own. 

She is now 18 years old. His daughter still hangs out with his adopted sister. 

11. 

Respondent has been an electrician since 2000. In April 2018, he began 

teaching in the apprenticeship program for his union - IBEU Local 11   and he teaches 

at the Electrical Training Institute and City of Commerce. He is a full-time instructor 

and works 40 hours each week. He sometimes also teaches a three-hour night class. 

. He 

credential to someone convicted of dissuading a witness. He does not want to teach 

kids, and he only wants to be a teacher for electricians and construction workers. He is 

 He has been teaching for almost four years. He 

submitted his excellent reviews from his students to the Commission, but he did not 

submit them OAH for his hearing. Respondent stated there 

6 

he teaches about harassment and being professional. He has done an excellent job at 

Besides teaching how to pull wire and bend conduit, 

teac

He is trying his best, and he is here to let the Commission know that he will not fail 

them. He stated, 

 Letter 

12. 

Respondent submitted a character letter by E. Thomas Dunn, Jr., signed 

on January 20, 2022. Mr. Dunn 

respondent in the criminal case against him for dissuading a witness. Mr. Dunn wrote, 

in part: 

[I]t was my opinion at the time that the cost and emotional 

toll of a trial was outweighed by the need to put the family 

matter behind Charles, and I advised him to enter a plea 

that I could later have expunged. In time, that is what I did. 

am describing were so minor and so trumped up, it seems 

to me unfair that he might lose his ability to teach because 

of the plea I had him enter. Accordingly, I respectfully ask 

that, to the extent possible, you grant Charles any 

consideration possible. He is a fine man, an upstanding 

member of his community, and well worth an investment of 

trust. 

7 

 
 
LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

Burden and Standard of Proof 

1. 

Once an administrative agency presents evidence that supports the 

denial of an application for licensure, the burden falls upon the applicant to 

demonstrate rehabilitation and fitness to hold the license. The standard of proof is a 

preponderance of the evidence. (Evid. Code, §§ 115, 500.) 

2. 

Education Code section 44345, subdivision (e), permits the Commission 

to deny any application for the issuance of a credential who committed any act 

other duties for which that applicant is certificated, or competence to perform the 

Evaluation 

3. 

There is broad discretion in determining what constitutes immoral 

conduct in the context of teacher disciplinary matters. (

 (1999) 20 Cal.4th 327.) Immoral conduct has been defined by the 

courts as follows: 

[T]hat which is hostile to the welfare of the general public 

and contrary to good morals. Immorality has not been 

confined to sexual matters, but includes conduct 

inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, 

indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; or as wilful, flagrant, or 

shameless conduct showing moral indifference to the 

8 

 
opinions of respectable members of the community, and as 

an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public 

welfare. (

 (1970) 9 

Cal.App.3d 967, 972, citing 

, 179 Cal. App 2d 

808, 811.) 

4. 

By virtue of 

 convictions for wet reckless and dissuading a 

witness, he committed an act of moral turpitude, and cause exists to deny his 

application pursuant to Education Code section 44345, subdivision (e). 

RELATIONSHIP TO FITNESS TO TEACH 

5. 

Any denial on the grounds that respondent committed an act of moral 

Code, § 44345.) In 

Supreme Court d

 (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 235, the 

conduct indicates that he or she is not fit to teach: (1) the likelihood that the conduct 

may have adversely affected students or fellow teachers; (2) the degree of such 

adversity anticipated; (3) the proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct; (4) the 

type of teaching certificate held by the teacher; (5) the extenuating or aggravating 

circumstances, if any, surrounding the conduct in question; (6) the praiseworthiness or 

blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the conduct; (7) the likelihood of the 

recurrence of the conduct in question; and (8) the extent to which disciplinary action 

may inflict an adverse impact or have a chilling effect upon the constitutional rights of 

the teacher involved or other teachers. (

. at pp. 229-

to the extent that they assist the board in determining . . . the teacher's fitness to 

teach, i.e., in determining whether the teacher's future classroom performance and 

9 

overall 

at pp. 229

. 

(1982) 135 Cal.App.3d 278, 288.) The statutory definition of 

freedom of actio

1466) [citation omitted]. 

(2011) 194 Cal.App.4th 1454, 

6. 

Not all of the 

 factors must be considered, only the most 

pertinent ones. (

 (1993) 

16 Cal.App.4th 1766, 1777.) In 

 (1970) 19 Cal.3d 691, the 

Supreme Court detailed the process to be considered in determining fitness to teach. 

In addition to the 

factors, the court provided additional factors that may be 

considered to determine whether there is a nexus between the conduct and a 

the extenuating or aggravating circumstances, if any; (3) the effect of notoriety and 

educational process; (6) motive; (7) proximity or remoteness in time of conduct. (

. at 

fn. 5.) 

7. 

In considering the relevant 

 factors the following conclusions 

are reached

he available facts 

fellow teachers, except to the extent that they were members of the general public at 

risk of harm from intoxicated drivers. While respondent it currently teaching adults, the 

10 

credential he seeks would allow him to teach middle school and high school students 

who are 

-related driving conviction 

became known, this could send students the wrong message that it is acceptable to 

drink and drive. However, the likelihood of reoccurrence for respondent suffering 

another alcohol-related conviction is low. He has not been involved in any alcohol-

related incidents since his conviction in 2016, and he has maintained full-time 

employment and managed his responsibilities as a single parent. 

 in 2017   five 

years ago - is not necessarily remote in time. The blameworthiness of 

motives is reflected in his guilty plea. In addition, the conviction in itself sets forth the 

aggravating circumstance of respondent persuading a witness, who was a minor, to 

change her allegations. However, respondent guilty plea did not result in him being 

sentenced to any jail time, or being ordered to complete any type of court-ordered 

program, and he was instead ordered to pay nominal amounts in fees and restitution. 

His conviction was also expunged. In addition, there is little likelihood of recurrence of 

this type of conduct by respondent. His testimony was credible and he clearly stated 

the incident caused major emotional turmoil for his entire family. He was torn about 

being in the middle and he regretted his involvement. He cares for his adopted sister 

and his family, and it is evident this incident has affected him deeply and he will never 

again find himself in a position of dissuading a witness. In addition, there is little 

likelihood that the conduct may have adversely affected students or fellow teachers, as 

his conduct did not occur in his work setting and involved his family. Finally, the type 

of teaching certificate being pursued by respondent 

 a career technical education 

teaching credential   would permit him to continue teaching adults in apprenticeship 

programs. While the credential would also allow him to teach middle and high school 

students, he has never taught nor does he intend to teach students of that age. 

11 

8.

Finally, an important factor in this case is whether respondent has 

favor upon rewarding with the opportunity to serve, one who has achieved 

 (1987) 43 Cal.3d 1041, 1058.) 

Fully acknowledging the wrongfulness of past actions is an essential step towards 

rehabilitation. (

 (1989) 49 Cal.3d 933, 940.) While a 

candid admission of misconduct and full acknowledgment of wrongdoing is a 

necessary step in the rehabilitation process, it is only a first step; a truer indication of 

rehabilitation is presented if an individual demonstrates by sustained conduct over an 

extended period of time that he or she is once again fit to teach. (

(1981) 30 Cal.3d 312, 315-316.) 

Respondent accepted responsibility for his conduct and was clear that he 

regretted the situation in which he found himself being convicted for dissuading a 

witness. Pertinent mitigating factors are that respondent is regretful; he is motivated 

by a strong sense of responsibility and a desire to support his daughter; he has sought 

to continue his teaching career and to teach students the skills in which he excels; he 

has demonstrated good character as evidenced by his character letter; and he has no 

alcohol-related arrests and/or convictions since his wet reckless. (Cal. Code of Regs., 

tit. 5, § 80300, subd. (m).) On balance, these positive factors indicate a decreased 

likelihood that respondent will repeat his behavior. 

9. 

Based on the foregoing, the appropriate discipline in this case is to grant 

application with a period of probation under specified terms and 

conditions that will protect the public. 

12 

ORDER 

The application of respondent Charles Drouaillet for a Career Technical 

Education Teaching Credential is granted and placed on probation for a period of 

three years under the terms and conditions set forth below. 

1. 

Respondent shall obey all federal, state and local laws and regulations, 

including, but not limited to, the statutes and regulations of the Commission on 

Teacher Credentialing (Commission). A full and detailed account of any and all arrests 

or citations for any violation of law (except minor traffic offenses) shall be reported to 

the Commission, in writing, within 30 days of the arrest or citation. 

2. 

Respondent shall fully comply with the terms and conditions of this 

Order and cooperate with representatives of the Commission in its monitoring and 

investigation of his compliance. Any credentials issued to respondent during the 

period of probation shall be subject to the conditions contained herein. 

3. 

During the period of probation, respondent shall appear in person at 

interviews or meetings as directed by the Commission or its representatives upon 

reasonable notice. 

4. 

Respondent must provide written notice to the Commission within 15 

days of any change of residency or address. Periods of residency outside of California 

shall not apply toward completion of the probationary period. 

5. 

Respondent shall submit quarterly reports, under penalty of perjury, in a 

form designated by the Commission, certifying and documenting compliance with all 

terms and conditions of probation. Respondent shall execute release of information 

forms that may be reasonably required by the Commission or its representatives. 

13 

6.

During the period of probation, respondent shall inform the Commission, 

in writing, of all his employment that requires a credential. Respondent shall inform his 

employer of the reason for, and the terms and conditions of, his probationary status 

supervisor. Respondent shall authorize his employer to submit performance 

evaluations and other reports requested by the Commission. Respondent shall notify 

the Commission in writing within 72 hours after cessation of any employment that 

requires a credential. The notification shall contain a full explanation of the 

circumstances surrounding the cessation of employment.

7.

The Commission shall retai

the period of probation. If respondent violates any term or condition of this Order, 

after giving him written notice and an opportunity to be heard on the issue of his 

violation of probation, the Commission may set aside the stay order and impose the 

is filed against respondent during probation, the probation period shall automatically 

be extended until a final decision is made on the accusation or petition.

8.

Upon successful completion of the terms of this probation, respondent

credential shall be removed of all restrictions.

DATE: February 23, 2022

JAMI A. TEAGLE-BURGOS

Administrative Law Judge

Office of Administrative Hearings

14

