BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the First Amended Accusation Against: 

ELIZABETH FLORES, Respondent. 

Agency Case No. 1-63616308 

OAH No. 2021010005 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Eileen Cohn, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ), Office of Administrative Hearings 

(OAH), State of California, heard this matter by videoconference on July 8, October 4, 

5, and 11, and November 19, 2021 by video and telephonic conference. 

Complainant Mary Vixie Sandy, Ed.D., Executive Director (Complainant) of the 

California Commission on Teacher Credentialing (CTC) was represented by Stephanie J. 

Lee, Deputy Attorney General. 

Respondent Elizabeth Flores appeared and was represented by Elliott N. 

Tiomkin, Attorney at Law. 

The parties submitted briefs which addressed pertinent legal and evidentiary 

issues. For the convenience of the parties, their briefs were marked and lodged as 

follows: ALJ-1, Respondent’s Hearing Brief and Evidentiary Motions. ALJ-2, 

Complainant’s Brief re: Unavailability of Declarant and Hearsay Exception per Evidence 

Code section 1231; ALJ-3, Complainant’s Opening Brief; ALJ-4, Complainant’s Motions 

in Limine to Exclude and Strike Waiting Room Evidence, and Attorney Witnesses; ALJ-

5, Complainant’s meet and confer re: evidence dated October 12, 2021 and 

Respondent’s meet and confer dated November 2, 2021; ALJ-6, Complainant’s Closing 

Brief; ALJ-7, Respondent’s Amended Closing Brief; and ALJ-8, Complainant’s Reply 

Closing Brief. 

As more fully set forth in the record, the parties Motions in Limine were decided 

as follows. Respondent’s motion to exclude the transcript of the preliminary hearing 

testimony of DC in the criminal proceeding of Respondent’s son was granted, but after 

a review of the hearing testimony, a small portion of the preliminary hearing testimony 

was admitted as administrative hearsay. Complainant’s motion to exclude and strike 

waiting room evidence and attorney witnesses was granted. In addition, Respondent’s 

motion to exclude Complainant’s expert witness, Dr. Vince Carbino, was denied. 

Oral and documentary evidence was received.1 At the conclusion of the hearing, 

the record remained open for the submission of written closing briefs which were 

1 As set forth in the record and in response to the parties’ meet and confer 

letters, Exhibit ALJ-5, rulings were made on the admission of evidence. All exhibits 

were marked. The exhibit package with the exhibit lists constitutes the final evidentiary 

record and take precedence over the following list. All admitted and relevant exhibits 

were considered in developing the factual findings, whether or not cited. The following 

Complainant exhibits were admitted: Exhibit 1 (affidavit withdrawn by stipulation and 

Findings of Committee of Credentials removed) through Exhibit 3, Exhibit 4 (pages 

100-101 only, under 

(1997) 16 Cal. 4th 445 (

), the remaining pages 

withdrawn), Exhibit 5 and Exhibits 7-9. Complainant’s Exhibit 6 was not admitted as 

2

 
 
timely submitted. The record was closed, and the matter was submitted for decision on 

January 7, 2022. 

SUMMARY 

Complainant seeks to discipline Respondent’s teaching credential as a special 

education/paraprofessional, currently employed with the Los Angeles County Unified 

School District (District), on the basis of (1) unprofessional conduct, (2) immoral 

conduct, (3) acts of moral turpitude; and (4) evident unfitness for service. 

Complainant’s basis for discipline are two alleged incidents which occurred on the 

same day in April 2017 outside a courtroom of Los Angeles Superior Court where a 

preliminary hearing was being conducted on felony charges against Respondent’s son. 

direct evidence, but after a review of the entirety of the record, particularly the hearing 

testimony, a limited portion of the record of DC’s testimony was admitted as 

administrative hearsay (Ex. 6, pp. 60-67, line 4.) The following Respondents exhibits 

were admitted: Exhibit A1, A3-A4 (administrative hearsay); Exhibit A5-A10; Exhibit A21-

22 (jurisdictional and duplicative of Exhibit 1 AGO 12-13); Exhibit B1-B2; Exhibit D1-D2; 

Exhibit E, pp. 6-15-line 7, p. 17-line 21 (stipulation as to administrative hearsay, prior 

consistent statements); and Exhibit G, pp. G1-G7, G10-G15, and from supplements, 

pages, 55, 70, 72-74, 82-84, 89-90,113-114 (administrative hearsay, prior inconsistent 

statements). The following Respondent Exhibits were not admitted: Exhibits A2, A11-

20, A23-27, C, F and H. 

/// 

3

 
 
Respondent was accused of intimidating and attempting to influence a witness and 

assaulting a police officer.

Respondent maintained the events as described did not occur and further her 

conduct did not support discipline under the criteria for determining whether 

Respondent is unfit to teach, set forth in 

 (1969) 1 

Cal.3d 214, 224-5 (

).

Complainant failed to prove by clear and convincing evidence Respondent 

committed the acts alleged. Without a sufficient foundation to establish cause, the 

matter is dismissed. Further, absent cause an adverse action is not otherwise 

warranted. Under the guidance of 

 the evidence established Respondent is a 

respected, competent and caring classroom paraprofessional and as such, fit to teach. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Parties and Jurisdiction 

1. 

On December 3, 2015, the CTC issued a Certificate of Clearance 

(credential) to Respondent. (Ex. 3.) With this credential, Respondent was authorized to 

work as a paraprofessional/special education assistant by the District. The Certificate 

was in full force and effect at all times relevant and was set to expire on January 1, 

2021, unless renewed. There was no evidence submitted establishing Respondent 

renewed the credential. During the hearing, Respondent stated she was unaware it 

expired. 

2. 

The CTC’s Committee of Credentials (Committee) is responsible for 

investigating all alleged misconduct that may be cause for the CTC to take adverse 

4

 
action and the circumstances in mitigation and aggravation. (Ed. Code, § 44242.5, 

subd. (c).) 

3. 

On August 15-17, 2018, the Committee found probable cause to 

recommend revocation of Respondent’s certificate and all credentials, 

4. 

On September 23, 2018, Respondent requested reconsideration of the 

Committee’s decision and an administrative hearing. (Ex. 1, pp 12-13.) 

5. 

On October 17-19, 2018, the Committee reconsidered and sustained its 

decision to revoke her Certificate and all credentials. 

6. 

On November 25, 2020, Complainant filed the First Amended Accusation 

solely in her official capacity as the Executive Director of the CTC. The Complainant 

alleged Respondent attempted to intimidate and persuade a witness, DC, to change 

his testimony, in a criminal court action against her son, EFJ, and also assaulted a 

police officer.2 

7. 

Respondent timely requested an administrative hearing to challenge the 

First Amended Accusation.

2 Initials are used to protect the privacy of the parties. EFJ are the initials used in 

the First Amended Accusation for Respondent’s son, and DC and EL are witnesses called 

to testify at EFJ’s preliminary hearing. EFS is Respondent’s husband and father of EFJ, 

and CF is Respondent’s son who testified at the hearing. A protective order and sealing 

order will be issued separately. 

5

 
 
8. 

Before the two incidents alleged herein, Respondent had no disciplinary 

history with the CTC or the District. At all times relevant to the First Amended 

Accusation, Respondent was employed by the District as a certificated employee as a 

special education classroom aide. 

Complainant’s Evidence 

 WITNESS INTIMIDATION AND ASSAULT OF A POLICE OFFICER 

9.

On April 12, 2017, a preliminary hearing was held for Respondent’s son 

EFJ, in Superior Court Case Number PA08664. EFJ was charged with several counts of 

violations of the Penal Code: carrying a loaded firearm in violation of Penal code 

section 2589, subdivision (a), a misdemeanor, assault with a firearm upon a peace 

officer, in violation of Penal Code section 245, subdivision (d)(10), a felony and an 

enhancement charge based upon active participant in a criminal street gang, within 

the meaning of Penal Code section 2580, subdivision (c)(3).3 (Ex. 8.) 

10. 

The criminal proceeding against EFJ began with the preliminary hearing 

at the Superior Court, which occurred about a year after the alleged criminal conduct. 

Respondent came to the courthouse with other members of her family to provide 

3 The evidentiary basis of the criminal action against Respondent’s son or the 

truth or veracity of witness or documentary evidence, including police statements, 

related to EFJ’s underlying criminal charges are not relevant to this decision. As such, 

the factual findings contained herein should not be interpreted expressly or impliedly 

as statements implicating or exonerating EFJ or any witness or law enforcement officer 

from criminal or civil liability for their actions. 

6

 
 
support to her son. She went through security with her spouse and two or three of his 

siblings. The assigned courtroom was on the fourth floor and when the elevator doors 

opened she saw a bench in front and to the side of the courtroom door with some 

empty spaces and about 10 people standing or sitting, including uniformed police 

officers and individuals in everyday clothing. 

11.  When Respondent first sat down, she noticed two older Latino men 

sitting on the bench next to each other. She did not recognize or know them. They 

were talking. Her son’s attorney was expected to come out of the courtroom to meet 

with the family. 

12. 

Respondent’s spouse EFS sat closer to EL and DC than Respondent, but 

they both overheard EL and DC talking among themselves about the trial. EL and DC 

were at the scene of the incident which was the subject of EFJ’s trial and were called by 

the District Attorney to testify at the preliminary hearing. 

13. 

It was established that ELF’s father EF spoke to the witnesses about the 

substance of their testimony and observations. However, it has not been established 

by clear and convincing evidence, what, if anything, Respondent said to the witnesses 

which would constitute an attempt to dissuade them from testifying against her son, 

particularly DC. 

14. 

Detective Jose Chavez (Chavez) testified about his observations in the 

courthouse that day. He established a good-faith basis for his conclusion DC believed 

he was being intimidated by both EFS and Respondent. Chavez has been a detective 

for 31 years. He has conducted over 100 investigations of officer-involved shootings, 

had assisted in approximately 75 to 100 gang-related homicide investigations, and had 

extensive training in gang culture and lifestyle. 

7

 
15.

Chavez was not a direct witness to the criminal incident involving EFJ but 

had interviewed DC during the investigation of EFJ’s criminal matter and was present 

at the courthouse to testify. 

16.  When Chavez arrived and left the elevator he saw DC and EL sitting at the 

left side of a long bench located in front of the courtroom and briefly greeted them. 

Chavez had met DC in person on at least one occasion prior the preliminary hearing 

including the day of the incident. DC was subpoenaed to testify by the District 

Attorney. Chavez never spoke with DC about his mental health or other stresses in his 

life and was unaware of any reason DC would hesitate to testify other than the usual 

concerns of testifying in a possible gang-related shooting which occurred in DC’s 

neighborhood. Chavez also recognized EL. Chavez went in and out of the courtroom 

several times. As Chavez went into the courtroom, he did not recognize EFS or spend 

any time observing Respondent. 

17. 

The bench was about 30 feet in length and could accommodate several 

individuals. Chavez observed a large group of female and male adults, who appeared 

to be family members, including the two people sitting next to the witnesses, who he 

later was advised were EFS and Respondent, and their three children. Chavez did not 

initially observe DC to be upset or agitated on his many trips in and out the courtroom

over a 35 to 40 minute time period. However, after an interval of few minutes inside 

the courtroom when he came out into the hallway he observed a change in DC’s 

demeanor. EL and DC were on the bench with EFS and Respondent. He observed DC to 

be visibly distressed and ashen in appearance as if he had “seen a ghost.” Chavez 

asked DC if he was alright. DC left the bench and followed Chavez to the right side of 

the front of the courthouse where there were other officers, about 20 feet from where 

he was originally sitting. 

8

 
18.

DC provided information about his purported communications with EFS 

and Respondent: EFS and Respondent introduced themselves to him as EFJ’s parents. 

Respondent was sitting next to DC and EFS was sitting at her side. Respondent 

purportedly had in her hands a transcript or typewritten document of DC’s statement 

to the police of his observations of EFJ’s interactions with the police which were the 

subject of criminal charges against EFJ and the preliminary hearing. DC reported to 

Chavez the statements he alleged EFS and Respondent made to him which he 

repeated in his preliminary hearing testimony. Chavez directed DC and EL to sit with 

the uniformed police officers on the other side of the hallway. (Ex. 6, pp. 60-67, line 3, 

128-130, line 10.; Ex. G.) (DC’s statement to Chavez was admitted as an excited 

utterance pursuant to Evidence Code section 1240.) 

19. 

Chavez never memorialized his hallway interaction with DC by preparing 

his own written report. Respondent questioned Chavez’s veracity and credibility based 

upon inconsistencies between his hearing testimony and his statements closer in time 

to his hallway interactions. Chavez was the officer who filed the charges against EFJ, 

but did not record his conversation with DC, although he carried a recorder with him, 

and by his own admission, was the only one who observed and interpreted DC’s 

physical actions to be so extreme and his conversation as “babbling.” Chavez’s

interactions were memorialized by another officer in an investigative report but 

although it supported and explained Chavez’s observations of DC’s reaction to 

meeting EFS and Chavez’s testimony, the exact statements attributed to DC about 

Respondent constituted multiple levels of hearsay and were accorded limited weight 

under the authority of 

. (Ex. 4, pp. 100-101; Ex. G. pp.72:22, 73:5, 83:28-84:1, 84:3-

7.) 

/// 

9

 
20.  Nevertheless, despite inconsistencies between Chavez’s testimony and 

earlier characterizations of DC’s behavior and exact statements to him during the 

preliminary hearing, Chavez’s testimony about his general perception of DC’s 

demeanor was credible. Statements Chavez attributed to DC in the hallway were 

consistent with DC’s preliminary hearing testimony, discussed below (Ex. 6.) 

21. 

It is clear from the record, including the testimony of Respondent and 

the evidence of EFS’s criminal conviction, further discussed below, DC had informed 

the District Attorney of his concerns and provided preliminary hearing testimony 

about his purported communication with EFS and Respondent. The preliminary 

hearing transcript was not admitted during the hearing as direct evidence of the truth 

of DC’s statements. DC’s preliminary hearing testimony qualified as direct evidence 

from an unavailable witness in a criminal proceeding where gang-activity is alleged 

pursuant to Evidence Code 1231. DC’s preliminary hearing testimony was admitted in 

EFJ’s criminal trial, consistent with that statute. However, that statute does not elevate 

the preliminary hearing transcript to direct evidence in an administrative hearing, 

Unlike the situation where a transcript or deposition may be admitted as direct 

evidence for an unavailable witness in an action between the same parties pursuant to 

Evidence Code section 1291, Respondent was not a party to the criminal proceeding

and did not have an opportunity to cross-examine the witness about DC’s

observations which were unrelated to charges in EFJ’s criminal indictment. Nevertheless, 

upon a comprehensive review of the record, particularly witness testimony addressing the 

accusations of Respondent’s witness tampering, a portion of DC’s preliminary hearing 

testimony was determined to be admissible as administrative hearsay pursuant to 

Government Code section 11513, (Exhibit 6, pp. 60-61, line 3 and 128-130, line 20.) 

/// 

10 

22. 

Chavez informed the District Attorney what DC reported to him. (Ex. 4, p. 

101.) After EFJ’s counsel was informed EFS and Respondent were speaking with the 

witnesses, he left the courtroom to tell them not to engage in any conversation with 

witnesses. DC was sworn in to testify that day and his cross-examination was 

completed the next morning, April 13, 2017, at which time he was excused. 

23. 

DC reported to Chavez his interaction with EFS and Respondent. He 

maintained Respondent read from a transcript she held in her hand of his interview 

with the police and believed he was being pressured to lie. (Ex. 6, pp. 60-61 and 128-

129.) However, during Chavez’s preliminary hearing testimony in a criminal action 

brought against EFS and Respondent, discussed below, Chavez confirmed DC never 

expressly attributed to Respondent any statements pressuring DC to lie and did not 

threaten him. (Ex. G, p.3-4, ll.1) 

24.  Within a short time after Respondent and EFS were admonished not to 

speak with the witnesses, Laureno Alvarez (Alvarez), a detective in plainclothes, was 

directed to photograph EFS. Alvarez attempted to take a “covert photograph” (Exhibit 

4, p. 100). He approached EFS with his cell phone camera raised and pointed in his 

direction to take a “covert photograph.” Alvarez maintained he identified himself and 

asked EFS if he was the father. (

, p. 101.) Alvarez did not testify during the hearing

and any disputed statements or observations attributed to him were not persuasive 

because they could not be independently corroborated by any eyewitness. 

Respondent and family members were standing close to EFS. 

25. 

Chavez was in the hallway in front of the elevator doors, about 10-15 feet 

away from Alvarez. From that position, he joined with other officers to assist Alvarez 

who had asked them for backup. Alvarez was standing within one foot of the family 

11 

facing the family. Chavez was in a position to observe EFS’s and Respondent’s 

expressions of anger and a general atmosphere of chaos and yelling. However, Chavez 

admitted he was not in a position to observe any touching, and although he heard a 

female yelling, he could not confirm it was Respondent’s voice. 

26. 

Chavez ran to Alvarez’s position near EFS and the family and then 

notified the courtroom bailiff there was a confrontation in the hallway. Another bailiff 

was summoned to assist in calming the situation. The court noted the disturbance on 

the record during the preliminary hearing. (Ex. 8, p. 184.) 

27. 

EFS, Respondent and family members were escorted out of the 

courthouse and there were no other incidents that day or afterward during any related 

proceedings for her son’s criminal matter at the courthouse. As a result of the 

controversy created by the incidents in the hallway, Respondent, by court order, was 

prohibited from attending EFJ’s trial. (Ex. 7, p. 174; Ex. 8, p. 186.) 

28. 

Chavez acknowledged Respondent had no history of gang membership. 

29.  On July 10, 2017, Respondent’s son made a court appearance and 

rejected the District Attorney’s plea offer. 

30.  On July 10, 2017, DC was found dead. The coroner listed suicide as the 

cause of death, (Exhibit 5), but the circumstances of DC’s death, however disturbing, 

were not considered relevant to Respondent, the subject of this hearing. There was no 

evidence Respondent was involved with DC’s death or aware of DC’s death until after 

the District Attorney’s initiation of the criminal action against her. 

31.  On July 17, 2017, the District Attorney filed charges against Respondent 

and EFS (Los Angeles Superior Court, Case No. PA089190) for “knowingly and 

12 

maliciously attempt[ing] to prevent and dissuade DC, a witness and victim, from 

attending and giving testimony at a trial, proceeding, and inquiry authorized by law,” 

(Count one, Penal Code section 136.1(a)(2), a felony, and for “willfully and unlawfully 

use [of] force upon the person of Laureno Alvarez, when [they] knew or reasonably 

should have known that said person was a peace officer engaged in the performance 

of his or her official duties (Count two, Penal Code section 243, subdivision (b)). The 

District Attorney also added a serious felony enhancement to the charges for criminal 

gang activity pursuant to Penal Code section 186.22, subdivision (b)(4). For EFS, an 

additional felony sentencing enhancement charge was requested due to a prior 1996 

serious or violent felony. Warrants for the arrests of Respondent and EFS were issued 

and executed. (Ex. 7.) 

32.  On October 25, 2017 Respondent’s son, EFJ, after a trial by jury, was 

found guilty of one count of carrying a loaded firearm in violation of Penal code 

section 2580, subdivision (a), a misdemeanor, not the felony enhancement alleged 

related to gang membership pursuant to Penal Code section 186.22, subdivision (b). 

EFJ was found not guilty of assault with a firearm upon a peace officer, in violation of 

Penal Code section 245, subdivision (d)(1), a felony, and was found not to be an active 

participant in a criminal street gang, within the meaning of Penal Code section 2580, 

subdivision (c)(3) (Ex. 8, p. 198.) DC’s preliminary hearing transcript was read into the 

record due to DC’s unavailability. (

, p. 195.) 

33.  On December 21, 2017, EFS pleaded nolo contendere to count one, 

knowingly and maliciously attempting to dissuade a witness, DC, and the court found 

him guilty. Count two, assault upon a police officer, was dismissed as part of the plea 

negotiation. The court suspended EFS’s sentence and placed him on formal probation 

for a period of three years under terms and conditions that included 316 days in 

13 

custody with 158 days credit for actual custody and 158 days for good time/work time, 

and ordered payment of assessments, restitution, submission to blood samples and 

property searches with or without a warrant. (Ex. 7, pp. 178-179.) 

34.  On December 21, 2017, at the time EFS was convicted, the District 

Attorney moved to dismiss Respondent’s criminal charges. The court granted the 

District Attorney’s motion and dismissed the criminal charges against Respondent in 

the furtherance of justice pursuant to Penal Code section 1385. (Ex. 7, p. 212.) 

COMPLAINANT’S EXPERT TESTIMONY: FITNESS TO TEACH 

35. 

Complainant provided the testimony of expert witness Dr. Vince Carbino, 

who possessed a Doctor of Education, Educational Leadership and Administration for 

Urban K-12 Programs, a Master of Science in Educational Leadership and Counseling, a 

Bachelor of Arts in Public Administration, and Associate of Science in Law 

Enforcement. (Ex. 9.) Dr. Carbino has decades of professional experience as an 

educational administrator, and as a special education teacher and mentor for the 

District. He is currently the Principal of Independent Study at a District school, City 

Independent Study School and Virtual Academy. He also has had experience with 

disciplinary cases involving certificated employees. 

36.  On cross-examination, Dr. Carbino admitted he faced his own 

professional crises as an embattled principal of a District school where he was 

removed after there was public pressure for his removal from a troubled school. Dr. 

Carbino’s lack of recollection of key events regarding his history at that school was 

noteworthy. Nevertheless, his testimony was not adversely affected by his admission 

or incomplete recollection of his own history. Rather, Dr. Carbino’s opinion was 

discredited by his assumptions regarding Respondent’s courthouse conduct, which 

14 

were not supported by the evidence, and his admitted lack of information about 

Respondent’s school record, on-campus behavior and reputation. His incomplete 

foundation for his opinion negatively affected his analysis of the 

 factors, and 

his conclusion Respondent was unfit to teach. 

37. 

Dr. Carbino provided testimony about the relationship between out-of-

school conduct and the educational factors under the 

. Dr. Carbino 

had no personal knowledge of the dispute and did not know Respondent or her 

family. 

38. 

Dr. Carbino reviewed documents provided by Complainant which 

included her license history, the First Amended Accusation, the Committee findings 

and supportive documents, and the criminal charges against EFS and Respondent. 

39. 

Dr. Carbino’s opinion did not consider a wide-range of other information. 

Dr. Carbino did not review any statements by EL. He did not review any of 

Respondent’s school records including performance evaluations. Dr. Carbino did not 

consider the absence of any reports during Respondent’s decades-long professional 

career at the District of threats, bullying or physical assault, aggression, or violence, or 

any conduct which evidenced actual or potential harm to children or the school 

environment. Dr. Carbino was unaware of any social or news media reports of the 

incident and did not consider the absence of such reports significant. He did not 

consider the remoteness in time from the incidents. 

40.

Dr. Carbino’s conclusion was based on the presumption one or both

incidents occurred and Respondent, as a certificated teacher, threatened a witness or 

assaulted a police officer in a public setting, notably in front of children. Respondent 

was blameworthy for an “extreme level” of conduct and her public conduct alone was 

15 

justified revoking her licensure because it presented a potential if not actual threat to 

the children and the school setting. Acts of violence or bullying in the presence of 

children, can lead to negative outcomes for them as adults. Teachers hold public 

positions and as such, are expected to comport themselves in front of children 

appropriately. In addition, according to Dr. Carbino, Respondent, as a certificated 

employee, should be expected to de-escalate a situation. Dr. Carbino expressed 

concern about the potential notoriety if students or parents became aware of the 

situation, and the possible recurrence if Respondent failed to acknowledge her 

conduct. He also maintained her purported public conduct created a possible “chilling 

effect” on school personnel if no action was taken against Respondent, a conclusion 

which did not make sense. 

41. 

Dr. Carbino surprisingly and unconvincingly stated his opinion would not 

change if the allegations proved to be untrue. Dr. Carbino’s opinion did not follow his 

insistence Respondent was unfit to teach due to an “extreme level” of public 

misconduct unrelated to her behavior in an educational setting. 

Respondent’s Evidence 

THE INCIDENTS

42. 

Respondent has been married for 26 years to EFS. They have four 

children. At the time of the incidents at the courthouse in 2017, Respondent’s children 

were aged 21, 19, 14 and 7. Her oldest son, EFJ was the subject of the preliminary 

hearing and criminal trial. Her three other children accompanied her to the 

courthouse. Respondent learned of the circumstances of EFJ’s felony criminal action 

from a neighbor during a visit with her mother. She heard the officers shot at her son 

16 

and later learned her son was charged with possession of a firearm related to gang 

membership, and assault of a police officer with a deadly weapon. 

43. 

Respondent became aware DC and another individual EL were present as 

witnesses and sitting on the bench in the courtroom hallway when together with her 

spouse they overheard them speaking about the case. 

44. 

Respondent insisted during the hearing she did not recall any 

conversation with either EL or DC. She was seated next to them and EFS was seated 

next to her. She observed her spouse speaking with EL, who shared his first name. 

Witness EL made a statement to her about his observations of her son and the police 

officers and asked her if her son was alright. Respondent did not know DC’s name 

beforehand and in what seemed like “seconds” police officer Chavez came out and 

called for witnesses DC and EL. EFS also answered because of his shared first name 

with EL. Chavez accompanied both witnesses to the other side of the hallway where 

they were joined by other police officers. 

45. 

Respondent insisted she never had any conversation with DC and did not 

have possession of a police interview with DC or police report in the courthouse or at 

home, or at any time, and did not show DC any documents. She insisted she had no 

information to reach a conclusion DC’s testimony would be unfavorable to her son at 

that time.

46. 

Respondent’s testimony was not contradicted by any direct evidence she 

spoke directly to DC or had in her possession DC’s statement to the police. Based 

upon EL’s interactions with Respondent and EFS, and the circumstances, it is likely she 

did introduce herself to both DC and EL as Respondent’s mother and it is probably, 

based on EL’s recollection memorialized in his recorded statement to Chavez in July 

17 

2017, she said something to the effect what was happening to her son was unfair. (Ex. 

E.) 

47. 

Respondent reasonably and logically testified she was unaware of DC’s 

mental status. She also did not observe anything by his expression or demeanor to 

suggest DC was afraid. Respondent’s testimony was consistent with Chavez’s 

concession that his perception of DC’s demeanor was based only upon his 

observations and not those of other police officers. Respondent’s testimony was also 

consistent with EL’s statement. (Ex. E) 

48. 

Respondent called EL as a witness and he appeared by telephone. EL was 

another individual witness to the underlying criminal matter against EFJ subpoenaed 

by the prosecution to testify at EFJ’s preliminary hearing. He sat beside DC on the 

bench. EL was not initially aware EFJ’s parents were sitting near them on the bench. 

49. 

 EL did not evidence the same concern or fear Chavez observed with DC. 

EL recalled sitting on a bench with the other witness and at some point becoming 

aware EFJ’s parents were sitting on the bench. 

50. 

EL only remembered asking EFS and Respondent how ELF was doing and 

before hearing the answer, being told by a police officer to sit in another place. He did 

not observe Respondent show any papers or testimony, or suggest they change their 

story, lie or say the police were lying. EL did not observe DC saying anything; he 

observed him staying quiet. Respondent did not scare or intimidate them. 

51. 

EL conceded he would not have lied to the police and any statement he 

would have made would have been honest. 

/// 

18 

52. 

During the course of his cross-examination and re-direct EL became 

more circumspect and clearly annoyed about being compelled to appear at 

Respondent’s administrative proceeding. He suddenly professed not to remember 

asking how EFJ was doing at all or having a conversation. EL repeated what he had 

said during direct that the events moved quickly between seeing EFJ’s parents, which 

he now claimed he did not converse with, to being asked to move by the police officer.  

He insisted no one - Respondent, EFS or the police - intimidated him. 

53. 

EL did not recall being interviewed by the police about anything EFS or 

Respondent may have said to him and would not agree that anything would refresh 

his recollection. 

54. 

EL’s sudden change of behavior during his testimony affected his 

credibility as a witness and put in question the veracity of his testimony. By the change 

in his tone and voice he clearly became more guarded, agitated and suspicious of the 

purpose and consequences of his appearance. However, the essential and relevant part 

of his original recorded statement to the police remained materially unchanged. 

55. 

During EL’s recorded interview with Chavez on July 26, 2017, in response 

to Chavez’s questions about DC’s “attitude,” EL stated he did not appear afraid or 

uncomfortable. (Ex. E, p.7.) He noticed EFJ’s family arrive after he was seated with DC 

on the bench, confirmed EFS and Respondent identified themselves as EFJ’s parents, “it 

was a quick thing.” (

, pp.8-10.) After further questioning about whether EFS asked 

EL who he was, EL stated: “No, no, no, no. He just showed up and greeted us and that 

was it. He said he was the kid’s dad, you know. And that was it. That was it. And we 

just- we waited, after we moved to another bench, you know? Because there were 

quite a few of them: his mom and dad and his uncles. I don’t know who else was with 

19 

them, you know.” (Ex. E, p. 11.) EL stated in general he had no problems with any 

parents or the police officers, (Ex. E pp.5 and 12.) He denied EFJ’s parents told DC to 

change his story or Respondent showed him a piece of paper. (Ex. E, p. 13.) He stated 

Respondent only remarked it was unfair what was happening to her son and it did not 

happen the way the officer said it did; however, EL was emphatic, “they never tried 

anything with me.” (Exhibit E, p. 16.) 

56. 

Respondent’s other family members, including her sisters, arrived at 

about the same time counsel was admonishing her and EFS. As she was sitting with 

her spouse and family together on the bench, an individual, who did not identify 

himself as a police officer, but whom they later learned was Alvarez, wearing plain 

clothes and carrying a notebook in one hand, approached EFS at a rapid pace and 

pointed a camera at his face. Alvarez was no more than a foot in front of EFS and 

appeared agitated and aggressive to Respondent. Respondent reached up to block the 

camera but did not touch the officer. 

57. 

Respondent’s sister, Lorena Lopez, was present when Alvarez approached 

EFS and took pictures of the exchange, and nothing in the pictures showed 

Respondent hit his hand or made any physical contact. Respondent was not facing the 

camera, but Ms. Lopez testified and provided straightforward testimony consistent 

with her observations and photographs. (Exs. D-1 and D-2.) 

58. 

Respondent’s sister asked counsel for Respondent’s son to intervene, and 

he approached at the same time as the courtroom bailiff, who told everyone to calm 

down. 

59.  Ms. Lopez provided credible and straightforward testimony of her 

observations at the courthouse. She was candid when she could not clearly recollect 

20 

every detail of the incident from 2017. Ms. Lopez is a Certified Public Accountant (CPA) 

with a large accountancy firm. She came to the courthouse to support her nephew. 

When she arrived, she joined Respondent, EFS, her other sister and nieces and 

nephews. Respondent and EFS were seated at the bench, did not notice the two 

witnesses, or any conversation. At some point, she observed EFJ’s attorney come out 

from the courtroom but was not present or did not hear him tell EFS or Respondent 

not to speak to the witnesses. 

60.  Ms. Lopez recalled clearly when Lorenzo, the plain clothes police officer, 

approached. She was standing in the busy hallway when she observed a man approach 

quickly and with an expression of anger. He extended his hand and was trying to take 

a picture of EFS. He was not wearing a uniform or badge. He was wearing a black 

jacket, tie and sunglasses and held a binder. She got very close to EFS. 

61.  Ms. Lopez was “shocked” by the aggressive behavior she observed and 

the manner in which the individual, was trying to close in on EFS’s face. She became 

concerned for her safety. 

62.  Ms. Lopez observed Respondent attempt to get in the middle of the 

gentlemen and EFS to separate him from the unidentified man while holding onto EFS 

with one hand. Ms. Lopez never observed Respondent strike the unidentified man, 

make contact with him, or threaten him. 

63.  Ms. Lopez observed the situation end when one of the sheriff’s deputies 

came out and separated everyone. 

/// 

/// 

21 

64. 

The incident happened before the preliminary hearing. Ms. Lopez had an 

opportunity to be close to Respondent and never saw her with documents in her 

possession. She insisted her sister did not have a transcript. 

65.  Ms. Lopez is close to Respondent. As her sister, she naturally has a bias; 

however, she testified plainly and directly without hesitation or contrivance, and her 

observations were supported by her photographs. Ms. Lopez insisted she would not 

compromise her integrity or risk her profession by lying. She knows her sister to be a 

caring, compassionate individual, and a good mother and Aunt.

66. 

Respondent’s son, CF testified about his observations at the courthouse. 

CF is currently 19, attends Mission College where he is working toward an associate of 

arts degree, and works at a clothing store. At the time of the incidents, CF was 14 years 

of age, living with his parents, two brothers, including EFJ, and one sister. He 

accompanied his parents, brother and younger sister to court on April 12, 2017. When 

they approached the bench in front of the courtroom, he observed two older Latino 

men seated next to each other. CF was not aware the two men were witnesses. 

67. 

 CF overheard the men speaking to each other about how they ran when 

they heard the police shooting. He heard his parents being asked if his brother was 

alive and okay. CF heard his father respond that his son was safe and alive. CF did not 

hear Respondent say anything substantive to the men, to lie or change their story. CF 

did not observe Respondent show the men any documents or point to transcripts or 

police reports, threaten or intimidate anyone. 

68. 

CF only heard Respondent say, “oh yeah, that is my son,” in response to a 

question. 

22 

69. 

CF was firm about his observations of the men: He observed the older of 

the two men, who he did not know by name, but was later identified as EL, “doing all 

the talking” and the other man (DC) just listening. 

70. 

After about two minutes CF observed EFJ’s lawyer come out of the 

courtroom and tell them the two men were witnesses and not to talk to them. He saw 

the witnesses get up and leave after they were called by a “bald guy.” 

71. 

CF observed the second incident. His observations were consistent with 

the observations of other family members: An unidentified male approached, who he 

later learned was a police officer (Alvarez). Alvarez started putting his hands up to take 

pictures. CF did not know why he was taking pictures. He appeared to be right up 

against EFS’s nose. He saw his mother try to cover his father’s face. When she did that 

an argument ensued  

72. 

Soon afterward, EFJ’s lawyer came out and accompanied his parents 

down the elevator. His parents left. Respondent was not allowed inside the courtroom. 

CF did not leave and remained at the courthouse all day. No one interviewed him. 

73.

CF’s testimony was believable regardless of a natural bias to support 

Respondent who he considered a hard-working, caring, friendly and loving parent. His 

testimony was not identical to his mother’s. He did remember her speaking briefly to 

the witnesses.

74.  On July 19, 2017, Respondent was in her kitchen when a group of officers 

arrived at her home in special gear and with automatic weapons to enforce the arrest 

warrant for the felony complaint against her, described above. (Ex. 7.) 

/// 

23 

RESPONDENT’S EVIDENCE: FITNESS TO TEACH 

75.

Respondent has been an employee of the District for over two decades, 

from 1998 to the present. She was raised in Van Nuys, California and graduated from 

the local high school, obtained an Associate of Arts degree from Los Angeles Mission 

College and a Bachelor of Arts degree in sociology from California State University, 

Northridge. Respondent completed her Bachelor of Arts degree in two years while 

working and taking care of her three children. 

76. 

Respondent has enjoyed a successful career at the District. She began her 

career as a substitute teacher at Reseda High School and after a year began working at 

a District special education campus. After approximately two years as a substitute 

teacher, Respondent became a one-on-one special education aide and transitioned to 

a full-time position. She worked with one student for two years and then she worked 

with another student from the student’s elementary school through high school years. 

As a one-on-one aide she accompanied special education students to class, on the bus 

to and from school and extracurricular activities. Since 2007, Respondent has been 

assigned by the District to Grover Cleveland Charter High School. During her tenure at 

the high school, she advanced from a special education trainee to her current position 

of special education assistant which she has held for approximately eight years.

77. 

Respondent’s goal is to become a full-time certificated teacher. Her 

certificate of clearance was the first step for her in this process; however, it is not a 

prerequisite for her current position. She is awaiting the outcome of this matter before 

she can proceed to the next step. 

78.

After the District was notified of the criminal complaint filed against her 

at the start of the school year in August 2017, Respondent was immediately removed 

24 

from the classroom. She continued to work at the District and was not terminated or 

suspended.

79. 

The District did not initiate its own investigation or any administrative 

proceedings. The District returned Respondent to the classroom after the criminal 

action against her was dismissed. Respondent returned to the classroom in January 

2018, after the conclusion of the District’s winter holiday break.

80. 

Respondent has received positive performance reviews as a special 

education assistant at Cleveland Charter High School. (Ex. A, pp A-5 – A-10.) In May 

2017, she was rated as exceeding standards in all areas rated, including work product, 

work habits, relationships with others, additional job-related factors. Of the five 

evaluations submitted, for years 2017, 2016, 2015, 2011, and 2008, there is only one 

instance in the May 2016 evaluation, where she received a below average ranking 

under work habits, which Respondent attributes to missing work due to one of her 

children’s illness. (Ex. A, p. A-3.) 

81. 

Respondent has been commended for her work as a special education 

aide, as an “amazing employee” and volunteer for activities which were not part of her 

work responsibilities. She is noted to be “tough as nails but with a heart of gold,” and 

collegial with a passion for her job. (Ex. B.)

82.

Scott Schmerelson, a member of the District Board, representing District 

3, testified on behalf of Respondent. He wrote and awarded the commendation 

referenced above during the 2014-2015 school year. He knew Respondent as a teacher 

who everyone liked. Schmerelson never worked directly with Respondent as a teacher. 

He interacted directly and daily with Respondent for six months when he was an 

administrator and on morning a.m. front-desk duty during the 2014-2015 school year 

25 

when Respondent was at the same District school. Schmerelson has over 50 years of 

experience as an educator, as a classroom teacher and administrator. 

83. 

Schmerelson was unaware of the allegations in the First Amended 

Accusation before his testimony. He does not have a social relationship with 

Respondent and has not been in contact with her since he worked with her in the 

2014-2015 school year. On cross-examination, Schmerelson stated he would be 

surprised if she lost her temper or made negative comments about the police, because 

there was a regular police presence at the school, and he never heard her make 

negative comments about them. Schmerelson never saw Respondent interact with the 

police and was unaware of the criminal action against her. Schmerelson provided 

candid, straightforward and credible testimony and was careful to be clear about his 

recollection and knowledge. 

84. 

Respondent enjoyed a positive relationship with school law enforcement 

personnel. Police Sergeant Jesus Arana testified on behalf of Respondent. He was 

familiar with the allegations against her. He met Respondent at a District school about 

a dozen years ago and became social friends with her about a decade ago. He has 

seen Respondent socially on about 10-15 occasions over the last decade. He has never 

seen Respondent upset or heard her say anything derogatory about law enforcement 

including accusing them of lying. She has participated in toy drive initiatives of law 

enforcement. He has observed her positive relationships and friendships with dozens 

of police officers in the area of her District campus. Respondent is considered the” go-

to person” when volunteers are needed for law enforcement’s Christmas functions. 

Sergeant Arana has been part of internal affairs investigations of police officers and 

noted, like everyone else, they are human and are capable of lying. 

26 

85. 

Ana Fonseca, a colleague of Respondent’s and special education resource 

teacher at the same District school, testified about Respondent’s duties and 

reputation. Ms. Fonseca has known Respondent for 13 years. They first met as 

paraprofessionals in special education special day classes where they implemented 

alternative curriculum. Ms. Fonseca reported Respondent was helpful with students 

teachers, and administrators and “loved” by all who worked with her. Respondent was 

considered a positive, friendly person who is known to stop and talk with everyone at 

work, including the children who know and love her. Ms. Fonseca considers 

Respondent “a ray of sunshine.” Respondent was known to be a resource for 

colleagues needing assistance with behaviorally-impaired students. Respondent was 

not known to be threatening, violent or aggressive. It would shock Ms. Fonseca if 

Respondent threatened a witness or assaulted a police officer. She has always been 

positive and shown support for the school police. Ms. Fonseca also developed a social 

relationship with Respondent. Prior to the Covid-19 Pandemic, they socialized a few 

times a year at birthday parties for their children. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

Burden of Proof and Jurisdiction 

1. 

The burden of proof for the First Amended Accusation in this case is on 

Complainant to establish cause for adverse action by clear and convincing evidence to 

a reasonable certainty. (Gardner v. Commission on Professional Competence (1985) 

164 Cal.App.3d 1035, 1039-1040.) Clear and convincing evidence has been defined as 

“[e]vidence of such convincing force that it demonstrates, in contrast to the opposing 

27 

evidence, a high probability of the truth of the fact[s] for which it is offered as proof.” 

(Mattco Forge v. Arthur Young (1997) 52 Cal.App.4th 820, 847.) 

2. 

An administrative hearing is a trial de novo. (Cal. Code Regs, tit. 5, 

(Regulations) §80317.) 

3. 

Pursuant to the Education Code (Code), commencing with section 44000, 

California Code of Regulations, title 5 (Regulations), commencing with Regulations 

section 80000, the CTC is responsible for credentialing teachers in public schools in 

California, including issuing credentials and taking adverse action against applicants 

and credential holders.

4. 

The CTC has broad authority over all “credentials,” defined under Code 

section 44002 as “a credential, certificate, life document, life diploma, permit, 

certificate of clearance, or waiver issued by the commission.” The CTC’s authority to 

institute or continue a disciplinary proceeding, suspend or revoke a credential or issue 

a public reproval or private admonition to a credential holder extends to all active, 

expired or surrendered credentials under Code section 4440, subdivision (b). 

5.

“Adverse action” is defined in Regulations section 80300, subdivision (a), 

as “a denial, a private admonition, public reproval, suspension or a revocation of one 

or more credentials.”

6.

Code Section 44421 authorizes the CTC to take adverse action against an 

individual’s teaching credential for, among many specified causes, immoral or 

unprofessional conduct, evident unfitness for service, or for any cause which would 

warrant denial of an application for a credential. Code Section 44345, subdivision (e), 

28 

allows the CTC to deny an application of one who has committed an act involving 

moral turpitude.

7. 

“Aggravating factor” is defined by Regulations, section 80300, 

subdivision (b), as “an event or circumstance which demonstrates that a greater degree 

of adverse action for an act of professional misconduct is needed to adequately 

protect the public, schoolchildren or the profession.” Subdivisions (b)(4)-(5) further 

provide, in pertinent part, that aggravating factors may include, “misconduct” which 

“significantly harmed… the public or educational system,” ad “demonstrated 

indifference toward the consequence of the misconduct, which includes failure to 

comply with known court orders.” 

Credibility 

8. 

The trier of fact may “accept part of the testimony of a witness and reject 

another part even though the latter contradicts the part accepted.” (

. (1973) 9 Cal.3d 51, 67.) The trier of fact may also “reject part of the 

testimony of a witness, though not directly contradicted, and combine the accepted 

portions with bits of testimony or inferences from the testimony of other witnesses 

thus weaving a cloth of truth out of selected material.” (

., at 67-68, quoting from 

(1958) 161 Cal.App.2d 762, 767.) Further, the fact finder may reject 

the testimony of a witness, even an expert, although not contradicted. (

(1971) 3 Cal.3d 875, 890.) The testimony of “one credible witness 

may constitute substantial evidence,” including a single expert witness. (

 (1986) 189 Cal.App.3d 1040, 1052.) A fact finder may 

disbelieve any or all testimony of an impeached witness. (

(1930) 105 Cal.App. 664, 671.) 

29 

9. 

As further delineated in the factual findings, not every statement of every 

witness, including Respondent, was considered credible. It was not credible, for 

example, to believe Respondent did not make any remarks to DC or EL. Respondent’s 

son and EL contradicted her on this point. Similarly, EL’s more recent prevarication 

about his recollection does not entirely negate his previous observations. Notably, 

Chavez could not attribute the same statements made by EFS to Respondent and EFS 

pleaded guilty to criminal charges for the conduct attributed also to Respondent 

which were dismissed. Overall, when the entire record is considered, there is 

insufficient evidence to support a conclusion Respondent intimidated or threatened 

DC or assaulted Alvarez.

The Charges 

10. 

Complainant has alleged several bases for discipline including 

unprofessional conduct (Code section 44421), immoral conduct (Code section 44421), 

moral turpitude (Code section 44345, subdivision (b)) and evident unfitness for service. 

(Code section 44421). 

11. 

Unprofessional conduct is “conduct that violates the rules or ethical code 

of a profession or is unbecoming a member of the profession in good standing.” 

(

 (1953) 41 Cal.2d 546, 553, internal quotation marks 

omitted, overruled in part, on another ground in 

 (1972) 

6 Cal.3d 575, 588, fn. 7.) 

12. 

Immoral conduct and moral turpitude are more loosely defined. In 

 (1960), 179 Cal.App. 2d 808, 811 

(

), conduct which is “immoral” has “been defined generally as that which is 

hostile to the welfare of the general public and contrary to good morals. Immorality 

30 

has not been confined to sexual matters, but includes conduct inconsistent with 

rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; or as willful, 

flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral indifference to the opinions of 

respectable members of the community, and as an inconsiderate attitude toward good 

order and the public welfare.” The Supreme Court 

, 

, pp. 223-224, 

quoted from 

. (1967) 12 Ohio Misc. 288: 

“[Immoral conduct] must be considered in the context in which the Legislature 

considered it, as conduct which is hostile to the welfare of the general public; more 

specifically in this case, conduct which is hostile to the welfare of the school 

community. In providing standards to guide school boards in placing restraints on 

conduct of teachers, the Legislature is concerned with the welfare of the school 

community. Its objective is the protection of students from corruption.” 

13.  Moral turpitude has been defined generally as an act contrary to honesty 

and good morals. 

(1991) 52 Cal.3d 968, 978). It has been further referred to 

as an “elusive concept incapable of precise general definition, but inclusive of 

“baseness, vileness or depravity” to other people or society in general, or as “any crime 

or misconduct committed without excuse.” (

 (1979 98 Cal.App.3d 167 

(citing, e.g., (

(1938) 12 Cal.2d 93, 97; 

(1957) 48 Cal.2d 69, 70

(1954) 43 Cal.2d 243,251).

14. 

The amorphous legal concepts of evident unfitness, unprofessional 

conduct, immoral conduct, and acts involving moral turpitude are so general that they 

must be given meaning in relation to the particular profession involved. (

, 

, pp. 227–228. In 

, the California Supreme Court held that adverse action 

may not be imposed against a teacher in the absence of evidence showing his or her 

unfitness to teach. The 

 court articulated a number of factors to be 

31 

considered in determining whether the misconduct in question relates to a teacher’s 

fitness to teach. 

15. 

For purposes of disciplining a teaching credential which, as defined 

includes Respondent’s certificate, the factors discussed in 

 have been codified 

at Regulations, section 80302. The factors address the relationship between the 

misconduct and the teacher’s fitness to teach. and include: (1) the likelihood that the 

conduct adversely affected students or fellow teachers and the degree of such 

adversity; (2) the proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct; (3) the type of 

credential held; (4) the extenuating or aggravating circumstances surrounding the 

conduct; (5) the praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the 

conduct; (6) the likelihood of recurrence of the questioned conduct; (7) the extent the 

discipline may adversely impact or have a chilling effect on the constitutional rights of 

the teacher or other certificated persons; and (8) the publicity or notoriety given to the 

conduct. 

Disposition 

CAUSE FOR DISCIPLINE: UNPROFESSIONAL CONDUCT, IMMORAL CONDUCT, 

MORAL TURPITUDE 

16. 

Complainant failed to establish by clear and convincing evidence 

Respondent committed the acts alleged, i.e., intimidating and attempting to influence 

a witness, and assaulting a police officer by reason of the factual findings. 

17. 

Cause was not established for adverse action against Respondent’s 

credential pursuant to Code section 44421, for unprofessional conduct and immoral 

32 

conduct, on the grounds Complainant failed to provide clear and convincing evidence 

Respondent committed the acts alleged. 

18. 

Cause was not established for adverse action against Respondent’s 

credential pursuant to Code sections 44421, and 44345, subdivision (e), on the 

grounds Complainant failed to provide clear and convincing evidence Respondent 

committed acts of moral turpitude. 

CAUSE FOR DISCIPLINE: EVIDENT UNFITNESS FOR SERVICE 

19. 

Cause was not established for adverse action against Respondent’s 

credential pursuant to Code section 44421 on the ground Complainant failed to 

provide clear and convincing evidence Respondent was unfit for service. 

20.

Generally, an analysis of the pertinent factors set forth in 

 are 

not required unless there is a finding of Cause. However, Complainant alleged 

Respondent was unfit for service and as such the 

 factors are instructive as a 

measure of Respondent’s fitness, competence and ability to effectively perform the 

duties authorized by her credential, and the absence of risk to the District or the public 

of her continued certification. It is unnecessary for the conduct to satisfy all the factors 

in 

justify discipline  (

 (1994) 28 Cal.App.4th 369, 384.) 

21. 

Complainant’s expert Dr. Carbino, was discounted because he based his 

testimony on the assumption Respondent’s conduct occurred as alleged, and even if it 

did not, her failure to de-escalate the situation in a public setting, an act, not alleged, 

was sufficient to render her unfit to teach. Based upon the evidence of Respondent’s 

33 

performance as a credentialed school employee and her character references, 

Respondent is fit to teach. 

A.

The likelihood that the conduct may have adversely effected students, 

fellow teachers, or the educational community, and the degree of such adversity 

anticipated. 

There is no evidence the events at the courthouse resulted in any adverse 

impact at the District school where Respondent has been employed for many years. 

She was not disciplined by the District and Respondent’s criminal charge related to her 

conduct in April 2017 was dismissed. In the interim, she was placed on administrative 

duties. The evidence established she was a competent and well-respected special 

education paraprofessional and had a strong and positive relationship with the school 

police. 

B. 

The proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct. 

The conduct alleged occurred in April 2017 and there have been no other 

allegations of wrongdoing prior to that conduct or afterward, on or off the school 

premises.

C. 

The type of credential held by the person involved.

Respondent is a paraprofessional working with a vulnerable special education 

population. Any criminal convictions or conduct short of convictions involving 

aggressive verbal and abusive conduct would appropriately subject her license to 

discipline. Here, there was an absence of clear and convincing evidence her conduct 

on that one day rose to the level of acts of moral turpitude, immoral or unprofessional 

conduct. 

34 

D.

The extenuating or aggravating circumstances surrounding the conduct.

Respondent is the mother of EFJ and was present in the courthouse for his 

criminal felony preliminary hearing, an extenuating circumstance. In aggravation, she 

witnessed an unknown male approach her husband in an aggressive manner. By 

touching her husband’s arm and coming between her husband and Alvarez, she 

attempted to intervene. Dr. Carbino’s opinion as a credentialed teacher she should 

have done more to “de-escalate” the situation was not credible or realistic. 

E. 

The praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the 

conduct.

Not applicable. Cause was not established. 

F. 

The likelihood of the recurrence of the questioned conduct.

The alleged conduct was not proven. There is no evidence Respondent has a 

pattern of aggressive, abusive or assaultive conduct. On the contrary, the evidence of 

her conduct at the District demonstrates she is a caring, capable and compassionate 

paraprofessional who is respectful of law enforcement. Licensing disciplinary matters 

like this are not designed to punish an individual. (

(1979) 95 

Cal.App.3d 161, 165.) Rather, a licensing agency should be primarily concerned with 

protecting the public. (

(1995) 38 Cal.App.4th 810, 

817.) There is no evidence Respondent’s continued certification will endanger her 

students or the public.

G.

Adverse impact or chilling effect on the constitutional rights or the 

person involved, or other certified person; 

No constitutional issues are presented by this dispute. 

35 

H.

The publicity or notoriety given to the conduct.

There was no publicity, no investigation by the District and overall no evidence 

Respondent’s alleged conduct resulted in publicity or notoriety or negatively impacted 

the District or her pupils.

22.

Regulations, section 80302, subdivision (b) provides the CTC shall close 

its investigation where it finds no relationship between the alleged misconduct and 

the certificated employee’s fitness, competence or ability to effectively perform the 

duties authorized by the credential.

23.

Cause has not been established that Respondent attempted to influence 

or intimidated a witness during a criminal proceeding or assaulted a police officer, and 

after a review of the testimony and evidence, her overall conduct that day failed to 

demonstrate Respondent is unfit to teach.

ORDER

The First Amended Accusation against Respondent Elizabeth Flores is dismissed.

DATE:

EILEEN COHN

Administrative Law Judge

Office of Administrative Hearings

36

