BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Accusation Against: 

DUANE EVERETT FLANIGAN, Respondent 

Agency Case No. 2-84522556 

OAH No. 2021080275 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Administrative Law Judge Coren D. Wong, Office of Administrative Hearings, 

State of California, heard this matter by videoconference on June 7, 2022, from 

Sacramento, California. 

Anahita S. Crawford, Deputy Attorney General, represented complainant Mary 

Vixie Sandy, Ed.D., Executive Director of the California Commission on Teacher 

Credentialing (Commission). 

Respondent Duane Everett Flanigan appeared and represented himself. During 

Ms. Crawford s opening statement, respondent disconnected from the hearing without 

warning. After waiting approximately 45 minutes for him to reconnect to the hearing, 

his default was entered and this matter proceeded as a default proceeding pursuant to 

Government Code section 11520.1 

Evidence was received, the record closed, and the matter submitted for decision 

on June 7, 2022. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Jurisdictional Matters 

ISSUANCE OF CREDENTIALS 

1. 

The Commission issued respondent a single subject teaching credential 

with an authorization to teach English on December 31, 2018. The credential expires 

January 1, 2024, unless renewed. His credential authorizes him to teach English in 12th 

grade and below, including preschool, and in classes primarily for adults. 

2. 

Respondent held multiple single subject teaching credentials with an 

authorization to teach English between June 22, 1983, and February 1, 2013. He also 

held a certificate of clearance from October 21, 1982, to November 1, 1987; an 

emergency limited assignment single subject teaching credential with an authorization 

to teach mathematics from November 16, 1983, to June 30, 1984; and an emergency 

1 Respondent stated at the prehearing conference that he may not attend the 

hearing. Additionally, the Commission's investigator called respondent shortly after he 

left the hearing, and respondent confirmed he intentionally disconnected from the 

hearing and would not return. 

2 

 
education specialist instruction permit with an authorization to teach mildly to 

moderately disabled students from September 1, 2000, to October 1, 2001. Those 

credentials, certificates, and permits have expired and been revoked.2 

PRIOR DISCIPLINE 

2007 Suspension 

3. 

On June 27, 2007, respondent entered into a Consent Determination and 

Order agreeing to the suspension of his credentials3 for 150 days based on the 

Commission s evidence that: 

A. On December 27, 2005, in the Los Angeles County 

Superior Court Respondent was convicted based on his 

nolo contendere plea, of a misdemeanor violation of Penal 

Code section 240 (assault). According to the police report 

Respondent had an altercation with a[n] off[-]duty police 

officer. 

2 The suspension, expiration, or revocation of a credential, certificate, or permit 

does not divest the Commission of jurisdiction to discipline that credential, certificate, 

or permit. (Ed. Code, § 44440, subd. (b).) 

3 The term "credential" includes "any credential, certificate, life document, life 

diploma, permit, certificate of clearance, or waiver, or other document which 

authorizes the holder to perform services which require certification and was issued by 

the Commission." (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80300, subd. (g).) 

3 

 
B. On January 26, 2005, the Board of Education for 

Inglewood Unified School District, voted not to re-elect 

Respondent because of his inappropriate and 

unprofessional behavior using profanity in his classroom. 

C. On October 15, 2003, Respondent resigned his position 

with Santa Monica Unified School District, while allegations 

of misconduct were pending involving test question 

irregularities. 

4. 

Respondent agreed the Commission s evidence, if true, constituted good 

cause to suspend his credentials, and he waved his right to produce evidence to the 

contrary. Complainant did not introduce any evidence of the truthfulness of the 

Commission s evidence. Nor did she introduce evidence of the specific laws governing 

public school teachers respondent violated. 

5. 

Respondent served his suspension from July 27 through December 23, 

2007. 

2012 Revocation 

6. 

Effective April 14, 2012, the Commission revoked respondent s 

credentials based on his: (1) February 1, 2010 misdemeanor conviction for violating 

Penal Code section 243, subdivision (b), battery on an officer; (2) May 25, 2004 

misdemeanor conviction for violating Vehicle Code section 23152, subdivision (b), 

driving with a blood alcohol content of 0.08 percent or greater with a prior conviction; 

(3) January 18, 2000 misdemeanor conviction for violating Vehicle Code section 23103, 

reckless driving; and (4) 2007 suspension discussed above. 

4 

7.

The facts underlying respondent s 2010 conviction occurred on October 

18, 2008, when police officers responded to a disturbance at Whittier College. Campus 

security had already detained and handcuffed respondent by the time the police 

arrived. Respondent was severely intoxicated, and security said he had been picking 

fights with others at a party. A police officer was in the process of removing 

respondent s handcuffs when respondent kicked him in the knee. 

8. 

Complainant did not introduce evidence of the factual basis for 

respondent s 2000 or 2004 convictions. Nor did she introduce evidence of the specific 

laws governing public school teachers respondent violated when his credentials were 

revoked or he engaged in the underlying conduct. 

Petitions for Reinstatement 

9. 

The Commission denied respondent s petition for reinstatement of his 

credentials at its December 12 and 13, 2013 meeting based on: (1)  the serious and 

prolonged nature of [his] misconduct ; (2) his failure to accept responsibility for that 

conduct; and (3) his failure  to address what steps [he had] taken to ensure [his] 

continued sobriety.  The Commission concluded respondent 

demonstrated rehabil

rom his prior misconduct. 

10. 

The Commission denied respondent s petition for reinstatement at its 

February 9 and 10, 2017 meeting based on: (1) 

[his] misconduct ; (2) the limited amount of time that had elapsed since he accepted 

responsibility for that conduct; and (3)  concern regarding [his] ability to maintain 

sobriety absent a sober living environment.

e Commission concluded he 

sufficiently demonstrated rehabilitation.  

5 

11.

Complainant did not introduce evidence of the specific laws governing 

public school teachers respondent violated by failing to prevail on either of his first 

two petitions for reinstatement. 

12. 

The Commission granted respondent s petition for reinstatement at its 

September 26 and 27, 2019 meeting. 

Respondent s Teaching Assignment at Lassen High School 

13. 

Kelly Herrmann began teaching special education students at Lassen 

High School (LHS) at the beginning of the 2019/2020 school year. The Lassen County 

Office of Education (LCOE) has jurisdiction over the school. Respondent was included 

on the LCOE

, and 

he was assigned to LHS as Ms. Herrmann s substitute during her absence on October 

30 and 31, 2019. 

RESPONDENT S INTERACTIONS WITH GH 

14. 

GH was a sophomore at LHS during the 2019/2020 school year, and Ms. 

Herrmann was his computer lab teacher. On October 30, 2019, respondent taught GH s 

computer lab class. 

15. 

Respondent was provided access to the school s computer network 

through a substitute teacher s account. However, he encountered difficulties accessing 

the account and asked GH for his login credentials. After accessing the network with 

GH s credentials, respondent asked the class aloud how to access  porn

school s computers. GH did not know how many students other than himself heard 

respondent s question, but he made eye contact with a few others and exchanged 

perplexed looks over the question. 

6 

16.

During the same class, respondent asked GH and another student to 

leave class and buy something for him from the grocery store across the street from 

the school. Neither student obliged respondent because students were not allowed to 

leave campus during class. 

17. 

Respondent was 

 and his classmates during 

class and regularly used profanity. GH did not recall any specific words respondent 

uttered, but he recalled respondent using  foul language

 to the class in 

general. 

18. 

School officials asked GH to document respondent s October 30, 2019 

behavior in writing, which he did six days later. At hearing, he did not recall preparing 

a written statement, and he did not recognize his statement when shown a copy. He 

explained he recalled respondent s behavior almost three years later because the 

behavior was so unusual and he had never heard a teacher use profanity prior to 

respondent. Also, no teacher has ever asked for GH s login credentials for the school s 

computer network. GH explained he  wouldn t want [respondent] again as a teacher.  

He graduated from LHS this past school year. 

RESPONDENT S INTERACTIONS WITH KB 

19. 

KB was a freshman at LHS during the 2019/2020 school year, and Ms. 

Herrmann was his math teacher. On October 31, 2019, respondent taught KB s math 

class. 

20. 

KB was sitting down in class while respondent was talking to another 

student. A classmate threw a crumpled piece of paper across the room, which 

respondent saw out of the corner of his eye. He thought KB threw the paper and told 

KB to leave the classroom. KB said he did not do anything but left the classroom. He 

7 

returned without permission about five minutes later. When respondent noticed KB 

had returned, he ordered KB to 

fuck out.  KB went to the classroom next door, 

told the teacher what had happened, and was sent to the front office to provide a 

written statement. 

21. 

KB completed his junior year at LHS this past school year. He explained at 

hearing he remembered respondent s behavior because he thought it was 

unprofessional and unusual  for a teacher to behave that way, and he had never been 

sworn at or kicked out of class by a teacher before respondent. 

RESPONDENT S INTERACTIONS WITH SS AND KP 

22.  Ms. Herrmann had SS and KP for different classes during the 2019/2020 

school year. Additionally, her classroom was KP s  safe spot  whenever KP became 

overwhelmed and needed a break from her assigned classroom. 

23. 

SS and KP provided written statements to LHS s principal documenting 

their interactions with respondent on October 31, 2019. That morning, respondent 

approached SS and KP and asked them to come to his classroom during second 

period to help paint his face green because he was dressed as the Incredible Hulk for 

Halloween. They agreed and returned to his classroom during second period. 

e taking a quiz in his class 

so they would be excused from the classes they were supposed to be in. 

24. 

SS and KP were wearing long shirts and fish net leggings for Halloween. 

While they were painting respondent s face, SS noticed he  was looking at [our] legs.  

That made SS uncomfortable, and she and KP began to hurry so they could finish 

painting respondent s face and leave. 

8 

25. While SS and KP were painting respondent s face, he began disclosing 

personal information. For instance, he said he was lonely, it was hard being a 60-year-

old substitute teacher, and SS and KP were his only friends. He invited them to lunch 

off-campus later that day. When SS and KP both said they did not have money for 

lunch, respondent said he had money, was lonely, and wanted to hang out with them. 

26. 

At some point, respondent suggested that they share secrets or gossip 

with each other. KP volunteered that she did not like one of her teachers at LHS. 

Respondent said his ex-girlfriend broke up with him because he shoplifted from stores 

and used methamphetamine, although he had not used methamphetamine in a week 

because it made him dizzy. He also said his ex-girlfriend called him a rapist after he 

shared a story he had written for her. 

27. 

Respondent asked SS and KP to take a picture of him after they finished 

painting his face. He then took a picture of them. He said the three of them needed to 

make up a lie so they could all go to lunch. SS and KP excused themselves to the 

restroom, left respondent s room, and did not return. 

Termination of Respondent s Services at LHS 

28. 

Courtney Russell was Lassen Union High School District s (LUHSD)4 

human resources manager and executive assistant to the superintendent during the 

2019/2020 school year. Sometime around Halloween 2019, either the school principal 

or his secretary informed Ms. Russell of various complaints the school had received 

about respondent s classroom behavior. 

4 LUHSD is a small public school district in Susanville, California, that includes 

LHS. 

9 

 
29. Ms. Russell discussed the complaints with LHS s principal, and he decided 

respondent s services 

.  On October 31, 2019, Ms. Russell 

informed respondent his services were no longer needed at LHS. 

Students  Complaints About Respondent s Behavior 

30.  Ms. Herrmann returned to school on November 1, 2019. Various students 

approached her during the first two class periods and complained about respondent s 

bizarre behavior the previous two days. She initially did not pay much attention to the 

complaints because she has learned to take student complaints about teachers 

grain of salt.  But Ms. Herrmann began noticing similarities in the stories being told. 

She began asking subsequent classes if anything happened during her absence about 

which she should know. 

31.  Ms. Herrmann documented the complaints she received in an email to 

Ms. Russell. The complaints included respondent reviewing his social media page 

during class, his profile page containing a naked picture of him, and GH s, KB s, SS s, 

and KP s interactions previously discussed. 

Respondent on Social Media 

32.  Ms. Russell received Ms. Herrmann s email on November 4, 2019, and 

searched the 

presence on social media. She found 

his Facebook page and was able to access his posts without being invited or accepted 

as a  friend,  entering a password, or complying with any security protocols. His 

Facebook page was 

one to see. She did not find any naked pictures of 

him, but his profile page included a picture of him from the shoulders up, his 

shoulders were bare, and he was wearing sunglasses and smoking a cigarette. 

10 

33.

Respondent wrote the following in a May 21, 2018 post: 

a take the 

specs below to a factory and have a blow-up doll made of the perfect woman, 

something to hold onto close at night; the p

-

generated pictures of two women, one wearing a bikini and another wearing a 

bodysuit or one-piece swimsuit. 

34.  On May 29, 2018, respondent posted the following on his Facebook 

page: 

NANCY PELOSI AND THE DEMOCRATS TOTALLY FUCKED 

UP in defending the MS-13 ANIMALS 

human beings and scored trumps [

] 40 million strong 

followers extra reasons to support his opinions. For 

example, the MS-13 favorite way to murder people is to pull 

out their guts while they are alive. There is nothing humane 

i

any election with such stupid PC attitudes about the MS-13 

murderers. And then there is their child rape and trafficking, 

drug dealing, etc. Plain stupid to defend such non-human 

animal

(Capitalization original.) 

35. 

The post includes a picture of a man from his head to his knees. He is 

laying naked in the supine position with his shoulders and head propped up against 

the wall. There is a cage over his midsection, and he appears to have been 

disemboweled. 

11 

 
Respondent s Written Statements 

36. 

Respondent did not offer any evidence at hearing, and none was offered 

on his behalf.5 However, complainant introduced several statements respondent wrote 

responding to the allegations against him that were provided or sent to the 

Commission. One statement addressed his use of profanity with KB on October 31, 

2019. Respondent described KB s alleged misconduct in class that day, and explained 

he asked KB to wait outside the classroom multiple times before KB complied. KB 

returned without permission shortly thereafter. Respondent continued: 

From what Administrators [

] have told me, when he came 

in a third time I said the  f  word in my comment for him to 

wait outside. I wrote a note to this effect about him to Ms. 

Herrmann (it is in her top drawer). Sorry about this incident. 

37. 

Respondent subsequently wrote a letter to the LCOE expressing  deep 

remorse  for using profanity with KB. He claimed to  know that it was wrong to use 

foul language regardless of the mitigating circumstances involved.

himself as 

 who curses.  

5 Prior to hearing, respondent uploaded 92 proposed exhibits to Case Center, 

used for digitally uploading hearing exhibits. He did not offer or withdraw any of the 

proposed exhibits at hearing before leaving the hearing, and none was included in the 

record or considered for any purpose. (

 (1911) 

159 Cal. 651, 656-657 [only evidence received in open court may be considered]; 

 (1991) 234 Cal.App.3d 100, 108-109 [a judge acting as 

factfinder may consider only evidence received in open court].) Consequently, 

respondent's proposed exhibits are not part of the administrative record. 

12 

 
38.

In his statements, respondent did not specifically deny any of the 

allegations against him. Instead, he relied on fallacious reasoning as evidence of their 

falsity. For instance, he facetiously thanked the Commission members for  waiting nine 

months to inform [him] of the allegations.  He claimed prejudice due to his memory 

fading during the delay and argued,  On the contrary, the two delinquent, criminal 

students (minors smoking marijuana is a misdemeanor, if tried in adult court) 

S[redacted] and K[redacted] had five days to coordinate, collaborate and disseminate 

39. 

Respondent explained he left the Santa Monica Unified School District 

due to  the incompetent and corrupt VP named Gloria Martinez [accusing him] of 

providing [his] students with salacious and pornographic materials.

e accused the 

Commission of siding 

 Catholic Nun [

] who 

illegally proselytized students on campus, was incompetent with ordering textbooks 

for my classes in the summer months and had peculiar opinions on education.  

Respondent concluded,  There is nothing in your list of charges that have anything to 

40. 

Respondent engaged in victim shaming by rhetorically asking why SS did 

not immediately seek help from another adult if she truly was the victim, explaining 

this is such bullshit.  He described KP as  not just a delinquent, pot-smoking criminal, 

but also a pathetic liar.  He espoused unsupported conspiracy theories about a LHS 

teacher or administrator [hacking] into [his] facebook [

] account  to view his May 

21, 2018 post. He further argued  it appears to me that administrators at Lassen High, 

perhaps even teachers, counselors, parents in collusion and collaboration sought to 

ruin my name with the complete package of illogical lies, distorted comments made by 

13 

 
 
me, and most venal of all, that I am a  leering pedophile, an extremely serious legal 

accusation.  

Notice of Respondent s Termination and CTC s Subsequent 

Investigation 

41.  On November 5, 2019, the LCOE removed respondent from the 

countywide substitute teacher list based on allegations of misconduct. The LCOE sent 

the Commission notice of respondent s removal the following month. The LCOE 

provided the Commission 

, 

s May 21 and 

29, 2018 Facebook posts, 

. 

42. 

Jeffrey Osborne was the Commission s special investigator assigned to 

investigate respondent s alleged misconduct. He reviewed the Commission s files on 

rior adverse actions and the documentation the LCOE provided. On July 

1, 2020, he sent respondent  a letter of inquiry.  Respondent provided written 

responses addressing the allegations. Mr. Osborne did not interview any witnesses 

because he believed he had multiple statements corroborating the allegations of 

misconduct, and he did not believe it was necessary to talk to any witnesses. Mr. 

Osborne prepared an investigation report summarizing the documents he reviewed 

and presented it to the Committee of Credentials for consideration. 

Committee of Credentials s November 18-20, 2020 Meeting and 

Subsequent Accusation 

43. 

The Committee of Credentials considered Mr. Osborne s investigation 

report at its November 18 through 20, 2020 meeting and concluded probable cause 

existed to recommend that the Commission revoke respondent s credentials. The 

14 

Commission gave respondent notice of the Committee of Credentials s 

recommendation and advised of his right to request reconsideration or an 

administrative hearing challenging the recommendation. Respondent requested an 

administrative hearing. 

44.  On June 9, 2021, complainant signed the Accusation solely in her official 

capacity. The Accusation alleges cause to revoke respondent s credentials based on: (1) 

unprofessional conduct; (2) persistent defiance of, and refusal to obey, the laws 

regulating the duties of persons serving in public school systems; (3) immoral conduct; 

(4) conduct that would have warranted the denial of an application for a credential or 

renewal of a credential   acts of moral turpitude; (5) conduct that would have 

warranted the denial of an application for a credential or renewal of a credential   

revocation of certification document; and (6) evident unfitness for service. The 

Accusation does not allege the specific laws governing public school teachers 

respondent persistently defied and refused to obey. 

Analysis 

CAUSE FOR DISCIPLINE 

45. 

The persuasive evidence established respondent engaged in 

unprofessional conduct, immoral conduct, and acts of moral turpitude while working 

as a substitute teacher at LHS. His conduct also demonstrated evident unfitness for 

service. Additionally, the Commission revoked his credentials in 2012. 

October 30, 2019 

46.  On October 30, 2019, respondent asked GH for his login credentials for 

LHS s computer network because respondent was having difficulty accessing the 

15 

network with the credentials provided to him. After accessing the network, GH 

overheard respondent ask the classroom how to access pornography on the school s 

computers. Later, respondent asked GH and another student to go to the grocery 

store across the street to buy groceries for him during class. 

47. 

Respondent 

 yelled at GH and his classmates during class, 

and regularly used profanity. GH did not recall any specific words respondent uttered, 

but he recall

 class in general. 

October 31, 2019 

48.  On October 31, 2019, respondent asked KB to wait outside the classroom 

during class because he thought KB was misbehaving. KB briefly left the classroom but 

returned without respondent s permission. When respondent saw KB, he ordered KB to 

get the fuck out

49. 

That same day, respondent asked SS and KP to come to his classroom 

during second period to paint his face green because he was dressed as the Incredible 

Hulk for Halloween. When SS and KP came to respondent s classroom, he called their 

teachers and told them SS and KP were taking a test in his classroom, even though 

they were not. 

50.  While SS and KP were painting respondent s face, he said they should 

share secrets or gossip with each other. He proceeded to tell them his ex-girlfriend 

broke up with him because he used methamphetamine, he shoplifted from stores, and 

she thought he was a rapist because of a story he wrote for her. Respondent also told 

them they were his only friends and invited them to lunch later that day. When SS and 

KP said they had no money for lunch, respondent said he would pay, was lonely, and 

16 

 
just wanted to hang out with them. SS and KP made up a story that they had to use 

the restroom, left respondent s classroom, and did not return. 

Facebook Posts 

51.  On May 21, 2018, respondent posted inappropriate comments and 

pictures objectifying women in a sexual manner. The following week, he posted 

graphic pictures and comments about disemboweling people while they are still alive. 

Though there was no evidence any student viewed either post, both were publicly 

available and easily accessible when Ms. Russell searched respondent s Facebook page 

on November 4, 2019. Additionally, there were complaints he accessed social media 

during class. 

2012 Revocation 

52. 

The Commission revoked respondent s credentials, effective April 14, 

2012, because of his prior convictions for reckless driving, driving with an excessive 

blood alcohol content, and battery on an officer and the prior suspension of his 

credentials. 

NO CAUSE FOR DISCIPLINE 

53. 

Complainant alleged cause to discipline respondent s credentials based 

on his persistent disobedience of, and refusal to abide by, laws regulating public 

school teachers. However, she failed to allege in the Accusation the specific laws he 

supposedly disobeyed and refused to abide by. (See, e.g., 

 (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 522, 526-527 [discipline may be imposed only on 

factual and legal grounds alleged in accusation].) Furthermore, complainant failed to 

prove which laws respondent disobeyed and refused to abide by while working as a 

17 

substitute teacher at LHS or when his credentials were disciplined in 2007 or 2012 or 

his petitions for reinstatement were denied in 2013 or 2017. 

FITNESS TO TEACH 

54. 

The Commission may take adverse action against a credential only when 

the underlying conduct demonstrates an unfitness to teach. (See 

 (2010) 184 Cal.App.4th 462, 473.) The California 

Supreme Court has delineated factors for determining whether misconduct 

demonstrates an unfitness to teach. (See 

 (1969) 1 

Cal.3d 214, 229-230 [analyzing former Ed. Code, § 13202, predecessor to Ed. Code, § 

44421].) The Commission adopted the 

 factors by enacting California Code of 

Regulations, title 5, section 80302. 

Cal.App.4th at p. 476.) 

Adverse Effect on Students 

 factors need to be 

, 

, 184 

55. 

Students are impressionable, and many try to emulate their teachers. 

Therefore, it is essential that an edu

oach, and he be 

capable of exercising sound judgment. He must be even-tempered. Respondent 

exercised extremely poor judgment when he engaged in the conduct described above 

while teaching at LHS and engaging in the conduct underlying the Commission s prior 

revocation of his credentials. 

56. 

Being an effective educator requires one to command the respect of 

others, and one cannot gain the respect of others if one does not show respect 

oneself

his feelings. 

 of KB demonstrated a complete lack of respect for 

18 

57.

The ability to foster productive relationships with students is essential to 

being an effective educator. GH never wants another teacher like respondent. 

Type of Credential Held 

58. 

Respondent holds a single subject teaching credential with an 

authorization to teach English  in grades twelve and below, including preschool, and in 

classes organized primarily for adults.

(Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80004, subd. (a).) He 

may be the only teacher the students assigned to him have for the duration of such 

assignment. Therefore, it is imperative that he exemplify the behavior society wants 

emulated by students, possess sound judgment, have respect for, and command 

respect of, others, and be able to foster productive relationships. The fact he may 

teach special education students makes having those character traits that more 

essential. 

Aggravating Factors 

59. 

The Commission has defined an  aggravating factor

 conduct or an 

occurrence that demonstrates more severe discipline  is needed to adequately protect 

the public, schoolchildren or the profession.

 Regs., tit. 5, § 80300, subd. 

(b).) Aggravating factors include a history of prior discipline and underlying 

misconduct that demonstrates repeated acts or a pattern of misconduct. (

., subd. 

(b)(1) & (2).) Respondent s credentials were suspended for 150 days in 2007, and they 

were revoked five years later. Two petitions for reinstatement were denied before his 

credentials were finally reinstated in 2019. Additionally, the current Accusation is based 

on multiple acts of misconduct which demonstrate a pattern of inappropriate 

behavior. 

19 

Likelihood of Recurrence of Misconduct 

60. 

Though respondent claimed to  have experienced deep remorse

his use of foul language with KB, he attempted to justify his misconduct by referencing 

 Seven months later, he wrote the Commission 

a letter proclaiming he was 

and professor and there [was] 

nothing in [the Commission s] list of charges that [had] anything to do with [his] 

teaching proficiency.  The complete lack of insight into a teacher s duties and 

responsibilities that statement demonstrates shows the danger respondent poses if 

allowed to continue working in public education. 

Notoriety of Respondent s Behavior 

61.  Ms. Herrmann received numerous complaints about respondent s 

behavior when she returned to school on November 1, 2019. Initially, she did not pay 

much attention to the complaints because previous experience taught her to take 

student complaints 

 a grain of salt.  But she received multiple complaints about 

the same types of behavior, and she began to take notice. She reported her concerns 

to Ms. Russell. 

62. 

Both GH and KB had sufficient recollection of respondent s behavior that 

they were able to testify from memory almost three years later. GH recalled 

respondent s behavior because he has never seen a teacher behave in a similar 

manner. KB has never been cursed at or kicked out of class by a teacher before 

respondent. 

20 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

Applicable Burden/Standard of Proof 

1. 

Complainant has the burden of proving the grounds for discipline 

alleged in the Accusation by clear and convincing evidence to a reasonable certainty. 

(

 (1983) 33 Cal.3d 532, 536 [an administrative 

agency seeking to discipline a license has the burden of proving the grounds for 

discipline alleged in the accusation]; see 

 (1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1036, 1039-1040 [recognizing that the clear and 

convincing evidence standard applies to disciplining a teaching 

courts have defined clear and convincing evidence as evidence which is so clear as to 

leave no substantial doubt and as sufficiently strong to command the unhesitating 

assent of every reasonable mind [citations]. It has been said that a preponderance calls 

for probability, while clear and convincing proof demands a 

[citatio

 (1978) 83 Cal.App.3d 890, 899; italics original.) 

Applicable Law 

2. 

The California Supreme Court has recognized that 

bstantially overlap one another and that 

conduct which constitutes one, often includes the other. (See 

, 

, 1 Cal

which violates the rules or ethical code of a profession or such conduct which is 

unbecoming a member of a profession in g

 (1953) 41 Cal.2d 546, 553; quoting 66 Corpus Juris, p. 55.) 

21 

 
Code, the court in 

 (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, said: 

In 

, 36 Cal.2d 734, at page 

740 [227 P.2d 449], the Supreme Court quotes with 

approval the following statement from Words and Phrases, 

permanent edition, volume 20, pages 159-

ined generally as that which is hostile 

to the welfare of the general public and contrary to good 

morals. Immorality has not been confined to sexual matters, 

but includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or 

indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; 

or as willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral 

indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the 

community, and as an inconsiderate attitude toward good 

order and the publ

(

., at p. 811.) 

3. 

The court in 

 (2011) 194 Cal.App.4th 1454, said the following about the 

definition of immoral or unprofessional conduct: 

Moreover, the definition of immoral or unprofessional 

conduct must be considered in conjunction with the unique 

position of public school teachers, upon whom are imposed 

responsibilities and limitations on freedom of action which 

do not ex

22 

 
 
(

., at p. 1466.)

4. 

u

fitn

 (1992) 2 

f

ires that unfitness for 

service be attributable to a defect in temperament 

 a requirement not necessary for 

a findin

 (

) 

5. 

The following has been said about the analysis for determining whether 

particular conduct constitutes sufficient cause for taking adverse action against a 

credential: 

, 66 Cal.App. 157, 168 [225 

P. 783], quoted in 

, 41 Cal.2d 

546, 553-554 [261 P.2d 261], found that the standards for 

judging the pro

to which that conduct may be the basis for the revocation 

of a credential, involves many aspects.

. . [

] the teacher 

is entrusted with the custody of children and their high 

preparation for useful life. His habits, his speech, his good 

name, his cleanliness, the wisdom and propriety of his 

unofficial utterances, his associations, all are involved. His 

ability to inspire children and to govern them, his power as 

a teacher, and the character for which he stands are matters 

(

 (1972) 22 Cal.App.3d 988, 991.) 

23 

 
Cause for Discipline 

6. 

The Commission shall discipline a credenti

conduct

discussed in Factual Findings 45 through 52. Such conduct demonstrates an unfitness 

to teach as explained in Factual Findings 54 through 62. Therefore, cause exists to 

discipline respo

conduct. 

7. 

The Commission shall discipline a credential  for persistent defiance of, 

and refusal to obey, the laws regulating the duties of persons serving in the public 

school system.

(Ed. Code, § 44421.) No cause exists to discipline respondent s 

credentials based on such conduct for the reasons discussed in Factual Finding 53. 

8. 

The Commission shall dis

(Ed. Code, § 44421.) Respondent engaged in immoral conduct as discussed in Factual 

Findings 45 through 52. Such conduct demonstrates an unfitness to teach as explained 

in Factual Findings 54 through 62. Therefore, cause exists to discipline 

credentials pursuant to Education Code section 44421 for such conduct. 

9. 

The Commission shall discipline a credential if the holder engaged in 

conduct that would have constituted cause to deny an application for a credential or 

to renew a credential. (Ed. Code, § 44421.) An application for a credential or to renew a 

credential may be denied for acts of moral turpitude. (Ed. Code, § 44345, subd. (e).) 

Respondent engaged in acts of moral turpitude as discussed in Factual Findings 45 

through 52. Such conduct demonstrates an unfitness to teach as explained in Factual 

Findings 54 through 62. Therefore, cause exists to discipline his credentials pursuant to 

24 

Education Code section 44421 as that statute relates to Education Code section 44345, 

subdivision (e). 

10. 

An application for a credential or to renew a credential may be denied if 

the holder or applicant  has had a certification document revoked.

. Code, § 44345, 

subd. (f).) The Commission revoked respondent s credentials in 2012 as discussed in 

Factual Findings 45 through 52. Such conduct demonstrates an unfitness to teach as 

explained in Factual Findings 54 through 62. Therefore, cause exists to discipline his 

credentials pursuant to Education Code section 44421 as that statute relates to 

Education Code section 44345, subdivision (f). 

11. 

The Commission shall discipline a credential 

ness for 

service.  (Ed. Code, § 44421.) Respondent demonstrated evident unfitness for service 

as discussed in Factual Findings 45 through 52. Such conduct demonstrates an 

unfitness to teach as explained in Factual Findings 54 through 62. Therefore, cause 

exists to discipline his credentials pursuant to Education Code section 44421 for such 

conduct. 

Conclusion 

12. 

Cause exists to discipline respondent s credentials for the reasons 

explained in Legal Conclusions 6 and 8 through 11, individually and collectively. 

Respondent introduced no evidence of his continued ability to perform the duties and 

responsibilities of a public school teacher in a manner consistent with public health, 

safety, and welfare. Therefore, his credentials should be revoked. 

25 

ORDER 

Respondent Duane Everett Flanigan s single subject teaching credential with an 

authorization for English and all other credentials, certificates, and authorizations the 

Commission issued him are REVOKED. 

DATE: July 6, 2022

COREN D. WONG 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings

26 

 
 
