BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Accusation Against: 

LINCOLN DUANE JOHNSON, 

Clear Administrative Services Credential 

Clear Single Subject Teaching Credential 

Educational Specialist Instruction Credential, 

Certificate of Eligibility, Respondent. 

Agency Case No. 2-57092578 

OAH Case No. 2021080346 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Jennifer M. Russell, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, 

State of California, heard this matter by videoconference on January 20, 2022. Deputy 

Attorney General Mario Cuahutle represented complainant Mary Vixie Sandy, Ed. D., 

Executive Director, Commission on Teacher Credentialing (Commission), State of 

California. Respondent Lincoln Duane Johnson represented himself. 

Testimony and documents were received in evidence. The record closed, and 

the matter was submitted for decision at the conclusion of the hearing. Subsequently, 

pursuant to a February 8, 2022 order the record was re-opened for complainant to 

submit an unobscured copy of page 7 of the July 17, 2019 Notice of Adverse Action 

received in evidence as Exhibit 5. Complainant’s submission is marked for identification 

and received in evidence as Exhibit 7. The record closed and the matter resubmitted 

on February 18, 2022. 

Complainant seeks imposition of a 90-day suspension of respondent’s 

credentials and certificate based on the following allegations: in the aftermath of a test 

breach respondent wrote a memorandum requesting administrative review of a 

teacher without supporting evidence the teacher engaged in misconduct; respondent 

falsely claimed he delivered documents pertaining to the test breach to certain 

personnel; respondent failed to document his absence from work on a certain day; and 

respondent’s employer has taken adverse action against him. Complainant failed to 

prove by clear and convincing evidence respondent committed acts constituting 

unprofessional conduct, immoral conduct, and moral turpitude and demonstrated 

inadequacies indicating evident unfitness to teach. The Administrative Law Judge 

makes the following Factual Findings, Legal Conclusions, and Order dismissing the 

Accusation.

2

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Procedural History and Jurisdictional Matters 

1.

The Commission is responsible for credentialing public teachers and 

taking adverse action against applicants and credentialed holders. (Ed. Code, § 44000, 

et seq.; Calif. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80001, et seq.) 

2. 

On June 5, 2015, the Commission issued Clear Administrative Services 

Credential to respondent. The Administrative Services Credential, which was in full 

force and effect at all times relevant to the charges alleged in the Accusation, expires 

on July 1, 2025. 

3. 

On June 5, 2015, the Commission issued Clear Single Subject Teaching 

Credential to respondent. The Teaching Credential, which was in full force and effect at 

all times relevant to the charges alleged in the Accusation, expires on July 1, 2025.

4.

On January 23, 2009, the Commission issued Educational Specialist 

Instruction Credential, Certificate of Eligibility to respondent. The Certificate was in full 

force and effect at all times relevant to the charges alleged in the Accusation. 

5.

On July 30, 2019, the Commission received notification the California 

Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation (CDCR) dismissed respondent from his 

employment at the California City Correctional Facility (CCCF), pursuant to a Notice of 

Adverse Action (NOAA), effective at the close of business on July 25, 2019. Respondent 

and the CDCR subsequently entered a Stipulation and Release, which, among other 

things, modifies the penalty imposed by the NOAA from dismissal to a 90-day 

suspension followed by a demotion. (See Factual Findings 56 through 59.)

3

6. 

During meetings held August 19 through 21, 2020, the Commission 

determined, in accordance with Education Code sections 44242.5 and 44244, probable 

cause exists to subject respondent’s teaching credentials and certification documents 

to a 90-day suspension. 

7. 

Respondent requested an administrative hearing to challenge the 

Commission’s determination to impose a 90-day suspension of his teaching 

credentials and certification documents. 

8. 

Pursuant to Education Code section 44242.5, subdivision (3)(c)(B), on May 

21, 2021, complainant, acting in an official capacity, filed the Accusation. 

9. 

On June 11, 2021, respondent filed a Notice of Defense. 

10. 

All jurisdictional requirements are satisfied. 

Respondent’s Background 

11. 

Respondent, who comes from a family of educators, holds a doctoral 

degree in educational leadership. He explained at hearing, as an educator, he has 

always been committed to working “in the worst areas with the worst-off students.” 

Respondent has worked in a variety of challenging public-school settings. 

12.

Respondent was first credentialed in September 1994. Since then, in 

addition to the credentials and certification set forth in Factual Findings 2 through 4, 

he held several other credentials that are expired and no longer in effect. 

13.

Respondent has a prior history of misconduct resulting in multiple 

adverse actions by the Commission.

4

(a). 

In 1998, respondent slapped his spouse who threw liquid in his face. As a 

consequence, respondent was convicted for inflicting corporal punishment on spouse 

in violation of Penal Code section 273.5, subdivision (a), a misdemeanor that was 

subsequently expunged pursuant to Penal Code section1203.4. Based on that matter, 

in 2000, the Commission issued respondent a public reproval. 

(b) 

In 1998, respondent stole a tie from a Nordstrom store. As a 

consequence, respondent was convicted for petty theft in violation of Penal Code 

section 484, subdivision (a), a misdemeanor that was subsequently expunged pursuant 

to Penal Code section 1203.4. In 2004, respondent stole $380 worth of merchandize 

from a Target store. As a consequence, respondent was convicted for second degree 

commercial burglary in violation of Penal Code section 459, a misdemeanor that was 

subsequently expunged pursuant to Penal Code section 1203.4. Based on those two 

misdemeanor criminal convictions and the prior public reproval, in 2007, the 

Commission suspended respondent’s credentials for 30 days. 

14.  On January 11, 2011, the CDCR employed respondent. He has served in 

various capacities, including Resource Specialist in the Division of Juvenile Justice and 

Supervisor of Academic Instruction before promoting to Supervisor of Correctional 

Education Programs in the Division of Adult Institutions. On August 21, 2017, he 

commenced working at CCCF as Supervisor of Correctional Education Programs. At the 

time respondent started at CCCF, he had a prior commitment teaching a 15-week 

teacher’s education program at San Diego State University (SDSU) in Calexico. 

Respondent disclosed this outside teaching activity to his superiors at CCCF, and they 

granted respondent permission to leave work from CCCF early each Thursday

afternoon for his commute to SDSU. 

5

15.

At hearing, retired Warden George Jaime testified he considers

respondent a compassionate educator. In a February 20, 2019 letter, he touted

respondent’s hard work and dedication as an educator and recommended respondent 

for the Senior Leadership Committee at CCCF. 

Dr. Lincoln has managed the education department at 

[CCCF] for the past 18 months. His dedication and 

commitment to students from different socioeconomic 

backgrounds and ability levels isa benefit to the institution 

and the Department. He is able to lead, develop and 

evaluate programs using innovative techniques and 

strategies. He would be an asset to the Supervisor [

] 

Leadership Committee.

Dr. Lincoln has received accolades from different entities for 

his management of possibly the most successful inmate 

education college program in the country. He is continually 

improving the education program at [CCCF]. His hard work 

and dedication to educate inmates helps them prepare for 

reentry to society. Dr. Lincoln continues to expertly work 

with all levels of individuals in the institution ad the 

educational community to coordinate the academic 

programs. He is very personable and passionate about staff 

and their students. I frequently receive favorable comments 

from staff and the public about Dr. Lincoln as a person and 

educator. 

(Exh. D.)

6

16.

As a collegiate football athlete, respondent injured his right knee. 

Respondent subsequently required more than a dozen surgeries in as many years prior 

to the November 16, 2020 amputation of his right leg above the knee. 

17.  On July 31, 2021, respondent resigned from the CDCR pending a medical 

retirement. 

The November 29, 2017 Test Breach 

18. 

Test breaches are a monthly occurrence at CCCF. “We are dealing with 

criminals. These guys are slick,” explained John Abril, Jr., who CDCR employed from 

2013 to July 2020. Abril severed in multiple capacities at CCCF, including General 

Education Development Teacher. Abril further explained when a test breach occurs, 

testing coordinators “get together to try to close the loop holes.” Practice and 

protocol require cessation of all testing, locking down the testing room, searching 

inmates before they are returned to their cells, and then “a memo goes out.” 

19. 

All personnel, including teachers and testing coordinators, individually 

prepare a memorandum detailing their handling of testing materials before, during, 

and after a test administration. The Supervisor of Correctional Educational Programs 

then compiles those memoranda and prepares a cover memorandum for submission 

to the CCCF administration and the Office of Correctional Education. 

20.  On November 29, 2017, just three months into respondent’s tenure as 

Supervisor of Correctional Education Programs at CCCF, there was a test breach in 

connection with the administration of the Comprehensive Adult Student Assessment 

Systems(CASAS) Reading Test 187—Series 1 through 21. Abril, who functioned as the 

testing coordinator, counted and distributed testing booklets and corresponding tests 

to teachers, including B.M., who in turn were responsible for re-counting and 

7

inventorying the testing booklets and tests before distributing them to the more than 

100 students taking the test. 

21. 

At some point during administration of the CASAS, a teacher discovered 

one of the testing booklets was missing. Respondent emailed Deputy Warden Sandra 

Green, his immediate supervisor at the time, and Associate Superintendent Jennifer 

Winistorfer informing them, “We have a potential CASAS security breach. The Testing 

Coordinator (Abril) and Teacher ([B.M.]) are working on confirming this as we speak. 

The test coordinator has also stated the process of halting all testing, and I will follow 

up [with] ISU [Investigative Service Unit] to try and initiate a search of the test takers 

and clerks who were present. I will follow up as this develops.” (Exh. 5 [Internal Affairs 

Investigation Report at p. 94].) 

22. 

At hearing, respondent testified, “On the day of the test breach, Mr. Abril 

came into my office and said, ‘We have a test breach.’ I knew the process, so I started 

compiling memos.” Respondent received a one-page memorandum from B.M. and 

another teacher. Abril “wrote a statement . . . not a memorandum,” (See Factual 

Finding 48.) According to his testimony, respondent compiled memoranda he received 

from proctors “in a red folder” and took them to the administrative offices. On his way, 

respondent encountered Lieutenant Javier Espinoza from ISU, to whom he handed the 

folder stating, “’We had a test breach and the institution needed to be searched.’” 

23. 

Respondent then went to see Deputy Warden Green. Respondent 

testified, “My supervisor had some history with Mr. Abril. She asked me if Mr. Abril had 

given a memo to me. I told her, ‘No.’ She asked me to draft a request for inquiry on 

him because he had some discipline issues prior to that day.” As Green had instructed 

him to do, respondent drafted a memorandum requesting an inquiry into Abril’s 

8

conduct for her review and approval. Neither party produced an original copy of this 

November 29, 2017 draft memorandum at the hearing. 

24. 

Respondent did not believe the test breach warranted the course of 

action Green contemplated. At hearing respondent explained, “I didn’t feel that was 

appropriate. I had only known Mr. Abril for a short period of time but he was very 

integral to the success of my program. I didn’t want to come in and discipline him 

beyond the progressive discipline that we have.” Respondent therefore called the 

Office of Correctional Education (OCE) and sought the advice of Associate 

Superintendent Winistorfer. Respondent testified, “I asked her if that was appropriate, 

that we were doing an investigation, an inquiry into adverse action for Mr. Abril. I 

thought that was too much; that was too far to go for a test breach as these things are 

pretty common. She told me I was correct. A request for adverse action would be too 

far for a lost test unless the teacher aided or abetted the inmate to steal the test.” 

Respondent reported back to Green informing her based on his conversation with 

Winistorfer, “’We shouldn’t do this. I should be writing either a letter of instruction or 

an employee counseling report.’” Green then “took that under advisement,” 

respondent testified. 

25.

On November 30, 2017, Abril prepared a memorandum addressed to 

respondent with a subject line stating, “Missing 187R Test #2.” Abril’s November 30, 

2017 memorandum delineates procedural steps taken on the days before and during 

testing to inventory testing materials. Among other things, in that memorandum Abril 

explains how he initially alerted respondent about the test breach and then how he 

kept respondent apprised of his and others’ efforts to recover the missing test booklet. 

(Exh. 5 [Internal Affairs Investigation Report at p. 94].) 

9

26.  On November 30, 2017, respondent was not at work at CCCF when Green 

emailed him asking, among other things, who was handling the test breach issue. 

Respondent’s email responding to Green, in part, states, “We have suspended testing. I 

have memos from the teachers and test coordinators. Just waiting for OCE to make the 

final determination regarding future testing. And a full audit of test materials has been 

completed” (Exh. 5 [Internal Affairs Investigation Report at p. 145].) 

27. 

Effective November 30, 2017, Green retired. When respondent returned 

to work at CCCF on December 1, 2017, he had a new supervisor, Warden John Garza. 

Respondent described the work atmosphere to which he returned testifying, “It 

became a finger pointing session. Teachers wanted to update their memos. People felt 

like they were getting into trouble because the idea of doing an inquiry into adverse 

action was scaring my staff. So, everybody wanted to rewrite their memos and 

basically point the finger at each other. We had about three rounds of updating 

memos.” 

28.  On December 1, 2017, Abril addressed another memorandum to 

respondent that duplicated, with the exception of minor non-substantive changes, his 

earlier November 30, 2017 memorandum. (See Factual Finding 25.) Abril’s December 1, 

2017 memorandum contains the following concluding sentence, “On December 1, 

2017 at 1153 I received a phone call from Dr Johnson asking me to write this memo.” 

(Exh. 5 [Internal Affairs Investigation Report at p. 97].) Respondent received Abril’s 

memorandum on December 1, 2017. 

29. 

Respondent testified, “On December 4, 2017, I recompiled all the new 

emails, all the now approved emails and sent that to everybody. Again, I did not 

update my original [November 29, 2017] memo that says Mr. Abril didn’t give me a 

memo but his [December 1, 2017] memo was attached to my group of memos.” 

10 

30. 

Three memoranda respondent addressed to Warden Garza were received 

in evidence at hearing: One, dated December 1, 2017, with “TESTING BREACH” 

referenced as the subject; a second, dated December 4, 2017, with “REQUEST FOR 

ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW-[B.M.], ACADEMIC TEACHER” referenced as its subject; and 

a third, dated December 4, 2017, with “REQUEST FOR ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW-JOHN 

ABRIL, ACADEMIC TEACHER” referenced as its subject. (See Exh. 5. [Internal Affairs 

Investigation Report at pp 70, 71, and 132.])

31. 

The December 1, 2017 Testing Breach memorandum states, among other 

things, “The proctoring teachers Ms. [B.M.] and Mr. [M.] have turned in memoranda 

regarding their involvement. To date I have not received a memorandum from the 

Testing Coordinator, Mr. Abril.” (Exh. 5. Internal Affairs Investigation Report at p. 71.]) 

32. 

The December 4, 2017 memorandum requesting an administrative review 

of Abril states the request is “due to inexcusable neglect of duty and Insubordination.” 

The December 4, 2017 memorandum further states the following: 

Specifically, on November 29 2017, Mr. Abril failed to follow 

testing materials security and administration, and protect 

the integrity of the Comprehensive Adult Student 

Assessment System (CASAS) when he distributed CASAS 

test booklets to Academic Teacher [B.M.], which resulted in 

the testing security breach of CASAS Reading Test 187R#2.”

By Mr. Abril’s conduct as specified above, he failed to 

appropriately inventory testing materials, account for all 

test booklets and answer sheets, and other testing 

materials. He signed coordinator agreements saying he 

11 

understood the pertinence of maintaining integrity and 

high standard of test security. 

Additionally, on November 29, 2017, I gave a directive to 

Mr. Abril to submit a memorandum to me outlining his 

involvement and/or handling of the lost materials on the 

day of the testing breach, before he left institutional 

grounds. He submitted it on December 1, 2017, 2 days after 

he was given a directive to submit the memorandum. 

(Exh. 5. [Internal Affairs Investigation Report at p. 71.]) 

33. 

As discussed in Legal Conclusions 19 and 20, complainant failed to prove 

by clear and convincing evidence respondent committed acts constituting 

unprofessional conduct, immoral conduct, and moral turpitude and demonstrated 

inadequacies indicating evident unfitness for service in connection with the December 

4, 2017 memorandum. 

Respondent’s November 30, 2017 Absence 

34. 

At CDCR, respondent is enrolled in an annual leave program to receive 

annual leave credits for his use to cover his absences from work. CDCR employees, 

including respondent, report attendance using Form CDCR 998-A (CDCR 998). 

Typically, an employee submits the CDCR 998 to a designated supervisor who reviews 

it for accuracy. If the CDCR 998 contains inaccuracies or is incomplete, the supervisor 

returns it to the employee for correction. Once the CDCR 998 is corrected, the 

supervisor forwards it to the Personnel Office for processing. 

12 

35.  On Thursday, November 30, 2017, respondent’s duty hours at CCCF were 

to begin at 8:00 a.m. Respondent, however, was experiencing pain. At hearing he 

explained, “At this point, I was at my thirteenth knee surgery. Most of it had to do with 

my knee hurting. I had a tumor prosthesis put in my leg. They cut my bones and put a 

tumor prosthesis inside my leg. That tumor prosthesis would hurt some days. There 

would be too much pressure because it would be pressing against a nerve, and I 

would have to take medicine to try to take away the pain. This morning I was going to 

be late for work because my leg wasn’t cooperating.” 

36. 

Respondent testified, “That morning, I called and told my assistant and 

supervisor that I was going to be late. I thought I would only get there at about 10:00 

a.m. My assistant kept checking with me as it got closer to 10:00 a.m.” Respondent 

asserted when he realized he would be later than anticipated, at approximately 11:00 

a.m., he sent an email to his supervisor and assistant informing them of his changed 

plans, according to his testimony. Respondent testified he informed his assistant and 

supervisor he “wasn’t going to come.” At hearing, respondent explained, “From my 

perspective, it didn’t make sense to come to work for two hours to drive to San Diego 

State. I was going to relax, and then I would drive to San Diego State.” 

37.

Neither party offered documentation of the email communication 

respondent testified he sent Deputy Warden Green and his assistant at approximately 

11:00 a.m. on November 30, 2017. 

38. 

Documentation of email communications between respondent and his 

assistant occurring on November 30, 2017, between 12:39 p.m. and 2:04 p.m., with the 

subject reference “Are you Dead?” were admitted in evidence. Also, documentation of 

email communications between Deputy Warden Green and respondent between 

November 29, 2017, at 1:17 p.m. and November 30, 2017, at 1:46 p.m., with the subject 

13 

reference “Potential CASAS Breach” were admitted in evidence. (See Exh. 5 [Internal 

Affairs Investigation Report at pp. 146-149.]) 

39. 

Together, these parallel and at times overlapping communications 

establish respondent initially communicated with his assistant at approximately 8:00 

a.m. on November 30, 2017. Respondent’s assistant emailed him at approximately 

12:39 p.m. stating, “Hey, I’m about to call your boss because I haven’t heard from you 

in 4 hours. I don’t want to get in trouble if you are laying in a ditch somewhere.” 

Respondent replied at approximately at 1:33 p.m. stating “I told her where I am.”

40.  Minutes earlier, at 1:28 p.m., Green asked respondent, ”Where are you?” 

At 1:31 p.m., respondent informed Green, “Enroute to Calexico. It is my last Thursday 

having to drive down to imperial valley.” Green responded, “You were supposed to be 

handling the CASAS issue. Who is on point? Your secretary indicated you said you 

were going to be here also???” Respondent replied, “I worked with OCE earlier. We 

have suspended testing. I have memos from the teachers and test coordinators. Just 

waiting for OCE to make the final determination regarding future testing. And a full 

audit of test materials has been completed.” (Exh. 5 [Internal Affairs Investigation 

Report at pp. 146-149.]).

41.

At hearing, respondent credibly explained the circumstances under which 

he inadvertently did not claim any leave time on his Form CDCR 998 for November 30, 

2017. “That month, I had taken off several days. I got tonsilitis from a plane flight in 

the middle of the month, I had gone on a trip to Oklahoma to see my nephew play 

football, and on the plane, I got tonsilitis, so I was out five days for that. I took off two 

days . . . or three days before the 30th for something else. These were annual leave 

days. Pretty much I would call and say I’m not coming today or I won’t be in today. So, 

this month, I had seven or eight absences. I inadvertently forgot to put the last 

14 

absence. Typically, if it is blank that means you were at work. If you type something in, 

that means you were out and this is the reason. I had seven of my eight days there. I 

forgot the last day that I was out.”

42. 

Contrary to CCCF’s management’s customary practices regarding the 

processing of Form CDCR 998, respondent was not afforded any opportunity to 

correct his CDCR 998 to reflect his November 30, 2017 absence before its submission 

to the CDCR Personnel Office. 

43. 

As discussed in Legal Conclusions 23 and 24, complainant has failed to 

establish by clear and convincing evidence respondent committed acts constituting 

unprofessional conduct, immoral conduct, and moral turpitude and demonstrated 

inadequacies indicating evident unfitness for service in connection with his November 

30, 2017 absence. 

The Investigation of the November 29, 2017 Test Breach 

44.  On January 12, 2018, Warden Garza requested an investigation by the 

Office of Internal Affairs (OIA). Special Agent Richard Lee was assigned the 

investigation.

45.

In May 2018, the lost testing booklet was found.

46.  OIA notified Abril it would be interviewing him. On August 1, 2018, Abril 

asked respondent for a memorandum explaining Abril’s conduct reporting the test 

breach. Respondent testified, “Mr. Abril comes into my office and says he has this 

interview and it’s about him not giving me a memo. I tell him, well you did give me a 

memo, and he asked if I would write him a memo. So, I wrote a memo that was very 

15 

general. It said we had the breach, he submitted a memo, we turned the memos in, 

and we got testing back.” 

47. 

Respondent prepared a Memorandum, dated August 1, 2018, for Abril 

stating the following: 

This memo is regarding the CASAS test breach that 

occurred on November 29, 2017. With regard to the 

reporting process, you reported to me immediately once 

the breach was discovered. Later that day, you provided me 

a draft of your test breach report via email, which was 

reviewed but not signed by you until the following morning 

November 30, 2018. You provided me with all the 

information, sign in sheets and other pertinent collateral. 

These items were copied and provided in a red folder to ISU 

Lt. Espinoza and Chief Deputy Warden B. Hedrick was 

informed of the breach. 

(Exh. 5. [Internal Affairs Investigation Report at p. 101.]) 

48. 

During his August 1, 2018 OIA interview, Abril told Special Agent Lee he 

provided respondent “an initial limited statement that included who lost the test, 

which test was lost and what he had done so far to try and find it” before he left work 

on November 29, 2017. (Exh. 5. [Internal Affairs Investigation Report at p. 14.]) Abril 

“wrote a statement . . . and not a memorandum,” according to Lee’s investigative 

reporting. “Abril stated he was not asked to write a memorandum by [respondent] 

prior to leaving work that day. Abril stated he could not write a memorandum that day 

16 

because all the criteria for the missing test booklet had not been met.” (Exh. 5 [Internal 

Affairs Investigation Report at p. 10.]) 

49.  On August 2, 2018, respondent received a call from OIA asking whether 

he wrote the August 1, 2018 memorandum for Abril. Respondent testified, “I told 

them, ‘Yes.’ I had written [Abril] a memo because he told me he had an interview 

where they were saying he never gave me a memo, and he had given me a memo. I 

received the memo December 1, 2017. So, he didn’t give me a memo the day of the 

breach, but two days later we were both there together and I now had the memo. So, I 

resubmitted it. I explained that to [OIA], and that’s when they told me I had messed up 

their investigation.” 

50.  On November 14, 2018, Lee interviewed Lieutenant Javier Espinoza from 

the ISU. According to Lee’s investigative reporting, Lieutenant Espinoza confirmed he 

received a folder containing documents from respondent. Lieutenant Espinoza 

claimed, however, he did not know the color of the folder and he did not receive it on 

November 29, 2017. (Exh. 5 [Internal Affairs Investigation Report at p 44.].) Lieutenant 

Espinoza did not testify at hearing. 

51.  On January 10, 2019, Lee interviewed respondent. According to Lee’s 

investigative reporting, respondent provided the following account of the 

circumstances immediately following the November 29, 2017 test breach. Abril 

approached respondent in the hallway and informed respondent about the breach. 

Respondent in turn “informed his staff to stop testing and to look for the missing test 

booklet to make sure the test booklet was absolutely missing. After Abril reported to 

[respondent] that the check for the test booklet was completed, [respondent] stated it 

was time to start writing memorandums [

]. [Respondent] instructed Abril and the 

staff involved in the breach to write memorandums [

] while [respondent] went to 

17 

inform the acting warden, chief deputy warden and associate warden of the test 

breach. [Respondent] stated he should have received memorandums [

] from 

everyone involved and gave clear instructions for staff to write a memorandum.” (Exh. 

5 [Internal Affairs Investigation Report at p. 32].)

52. 

Lee reports respondent stated he received an email from Abril on 

November 29. 2017, but respondent considered the email “insufficient” because it 

lacked a signature. According to Lee’s reporting, respondent said he instructed Abril 

“to type up a formal memorandum with his signature on it.” During the investigatory 

interview, Lee informed respondent a review of respondent’s CDCR email account did 

not reflect receipt of any email from Abril on November 29, 2017. Respondent “then 

stated maybe he was mistaken but it seemed that Abril sent him an email on 

November 29, 2017. Respondent then stated maybe he did not, maybe it was not an 

email and it was something else, he did not know and Abril would have that 

information.” (Exh. 5. [Internal Affairs Investigation Report at p. 33.]) 

53. 

At hearing, Lee testified during the investigatory interview he discovered 

respondent “was to be at work” but “no one knew where he was” on November 30, 

2017. In the investigative report he prepared, Lee notes respondent “stated he called 

out sick on November 30, 2017” but respondent’s “CDCR 998 . . . did not reflect any 

time used on November 29 [

], 2017.” (Exh. 5. . [Internal Affairs Investigation Report 

at p. 52.]) 

54.  OIA concluded its investigation on March 12, 2019, the date appearing 

on Lee’s Internal Affairs Investigation Report. It was B.M. who did not account for all 

the testing materials during the post-testing accounting and inventory processes on 

November 29, 2017. 

18 

55. 

As discussed in Legal Conclusions 21 through 24, complainant has failed 

to establish by clear and convincing evidence respondent committed acts constituting 

unprofessional conduct, immoral conduct, and moral turpitude and demonstrated 

inadequacies indicating evident unfitness for service in connection with respondent’s 

January 10, 2019 OIA investigative interview. 

July 17, 2019 Notice of Adverse Action Dismissing Respondent and 

September 25, 2019 Stipulation and Release Modifying Dismissal 

56.  On July 17, 2019, Warden Jaime served respondent with a Notice of 

Adverse Action alleging the following categories of misconduct: Dishonesty In Your 

Memorandum to Warden Garza, Dated December 4, 2017; Dishonesty During Your OIA 

Investigatory Interview on January 10, 2019, which includes Dishonesty Regarding Your 

Absence From Work on November 30, 2017 and Dishonesty Regarding Your Alleged 

Submission of the “Red Folder” to ISU; and Absence Without Leave and Falsification of 

Your November 2017 CDC 998, Employee Record Attendance. The NOAA informs 

respondent, “You have been dishonest in your written memorandums [

], emails and 

statements to investigators. Dishonesty is a trait that cannot be tolerated by the 

Department and which demonstrates a high likelihood of reoccurrence. Your actions 

were intended to perpetrate a fraud on the Department, cover for one of your friends 

and demonstrates your willingness to lie to the Department. Your actions bring 

discredit upon you and the Department.” (Exh. 5 at p. 8.) 

57. 

The NOAA specifically alleges cause pursuant to Government Code 

Section 19572, subdivisions (d) [inexcusable neglect of duty], (f) [dishonesty], (j) 

[inexcusable absence without leave], and (t) [other failure of good behavior, either 

during or outside of duty hours, which is of such a nature that it causes discredit to the 

appointing authority or the person’s employment], to dismiss respondent from his 

19 

position as Supervisor of Correctional Education Programs, effective the close of 

business on July 25, 2019. 

58. 

Respondent appealed the NOAA to the California State Personnel Board 

(SPB). 

59.  On September 25, 2019, in the SPB proceedings titled 

, case number 19-1200, respondent and the CDCR 

entered a Stipulation and Release. Respondent agreed to withdraw his appeal to the 

NOAA and to waive his appeal rights. The CDCR agreed to modify the penalty 

imposed by the NOAA from dismissal to a 90-day suspension followed by demotion of 

respondent from his position of Supervisor of Correctional Education Programs to 

Teacher (High School-General Education) (Correction Facility). The CDCR additionally 

agreed to modify the NOAA “to remove the charge of Dishonesty under Government 

Code section 19572, subdivision (f), and to remove any references to dishonesty in all 

charges” (Exh. 4.). The CDCR further agreed to remove the NOAA from respondent’s 

Official Personnel File (OPF) upon respondent’s written request on or after January 25, 

2021. The terms of the Stipulation and Release became effective at the close of 

business on July 25, 2019. 

60.

As discussed in Legal Conclusions 25 through 28, complainant has failed 

to establish by clear and convincing evidence respondent committed acts constituting 

unprofessional conduct, immoral conduct, and moral turpitude and demonstrated 

inadequacies indicating evident unfitness for service in connection the July 17, 2019 

NOAA and subsequent September 25, 2019 Stipulation and Release.

20 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

Applicable Law 

1.

Education Code (Code) section 44421, among other things, authorizes 

the Commission to suspend a teaching credential.

The Commission on Teacher Credentialing shall privately 

admonish, publicly reprove, revoke or suspend for immoral 

or unprofessional conduct, or for persistent defiance of, and 

refusal to obey, the laws regulating the duties of persons 

serving in the public school system, or for any cause that 

would have warranted the denial of an application for a 

credential or the renewal thereof, or for evident unfitness 

for service.

2.

Code section 44345, subdivision (e), authorizes the Commission to deny 

an application for a credential, or the renewal of a credential, made by any applicant 

who “[h]as committed any act involving moral turpitude.” 

3. 

“Unprofessional conduct” is conduct violating the rules or ethical code of 

a profession or which is unbecoming of a member of a profession in good standing. 

(

 (1953) 41 Cal.2d 546, 553.) The conduct in question must 

indicate unfitness to teach. (

149 Cal.App.3d 1167, 1174.) 

 (1983) 

4. 

“Evident unfitness for service” means “‘clearly not fit, not adapted to or 

unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of temperamental defects or 

inadequacies.’” (

21 

 (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444.) Evident unfitness for service connotes a 

fixed character trait, presumably not remediable merely on receipt of notice that one's 

conduct fails to meet the expectations of the employing school district. (

.) 

5. 

“Immoral conduct” has been defined generally as “that which is hostile to the 

welfare of the general public and contrary to good morals. Immorality has not been 

confined to sexual matters, but includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative 

of corruption, indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; or a willful, flagrant, or shameless 

conduct showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the 

community, and as an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public welfare.” 

(

Cal.App.2d 808, 811.) 

. 

(1960) 179 

6. 

Conduct reveals moral turpitude for the purpose of professional licensure 

“if it shows a deficiency in any character trait necessary for the practice of [the 

profession], (such as trustworthiness, honesty, fairness, candor, and fidelity to fiduciary 

duties) or if it involves such a serious breach of a duty owed to another or to society, 

or such a flagrant disrespect for the law or for societal norms, that [public] knowledge 

of the . . . conduct would be likely to undermine public confidence in and respect for 

the . . . profession. (

(2001) 25 Cal.4th 11, 16, citing 

(1992) 

1 Cal.4th 689, 698.)

7. 

Abstract characterization of a teacher’s conduct as “unprofessional” or 

“involving moral turpitude,” for example, is an insufficient basis for discipline. 

(

 (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 235.) A rational connection 

or nexus must exist between alleged misconduct and competence or ability to teach 

effectively. The determinative test is whether conduct demonstrates unfitness to teach. 

22 

(See 

. (1977) 19 Cal.3d 691.) Unfitness to teach is a 

question of ultimate fact. (

. at p. 698, fn. 3.) 

8. 

 identifies several relevant factors, formally codified at California 

Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80302, for determining unfitness to teach. They 

are as follows: the likelihood the conduct may have adversely affected students, fellow 

teachers, or the educational community, and the degree of adversity anticipated; the 

proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct; the type of credential held by the 

person involved; the extenuating or aggravating circumstances surrounding the 

conduct; the praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the 

conduct; the likelihood of recurrence of the questioned conduct; the extent to which 

disciplinary action may inflict an adverse impact or chilling effect upon the 

constitutional rights of the person involved, or other certified persons; and the 

publicity or notoriety given to the conduct. 

9. 

All 

 factors need not be present to reach a determination 

regarding fitness to teach. In other words, an item by item analysis of each established 

individual fact is not required. Rather, 

 calls for a comprehensive analysis of 

the accumulated established facts. (

, 

, 2 Cal.App.4th at 1457.)

Standard and Burden of Proof 

10. 

Complainant bears the burden of establishing the allegations in the 

Accusation by clear and convincing evidence to a reasonable certainty. (

(1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035.) 

11. 

A “clear and convincing” evidentiary standard means complainant must 

establish the charging allegations by proof that is clear, explicit, and unequivocal—so 

23 

clear as to leave no substantial doubt, and sufficiently strong to command the 

unhesitating assent of every reasonable mind. (

 (1990) 224 

Cal.App.3d 478.) 

Credibility Determination 

12.

Evidence Code section 780 catalogs several factors for evaluating 

credibility: the demeanor and manner of the witness while testifying, the character of 

the testimony, the capacity of the witness to perceive at the time the events occurred, 

the capacity of the witness to recollect and communicate, the character of the witness 

for honesty, the existence or nonexistence of bias or other motive, a statement by the 

witness that is consistent or inconsistent with the testimony, the existence or absence 

of any fact to which the witness testified, the attitude of the witness toward the 

proceedings, and admissions of untruthfulness at the proceedings. 

13. 

In addition, the decisional law acknowledges fact finders, including 

Administrative Law Judges, are permitted to “accept part of the testimony of a witness 

and reject another part even though the latter contradicts the part accepted.” (

. (1973) 9 Cal.3d 51, 67); to “reject part of the testimony of a 

witness, though not directly contradicted, and combine the accepted portions with bits 

of testimony or inferences from the testimony of other witnesses thus weaving a cloth 

of truth out of selected material.” (

., at pp. 67-68, quoting from 

(1958) 161 Cal.App.2d 762, 777); and even to reject testimony that is not contradicted. 

(

(1971) 3 Cal.3d 875, 890.)

14.  Witnesses testifying on behalf of complainant played no direct, first-hand 

role or part in the November 29, 2017 test breach incident. Warden Jaime issued the 

July 7, 2019 NOAA, but he admitted during his testimony the test breach occurred 

24 

 
“prior to my arrival” at CCCF. Special Agent Lee offered testimony based on his 

investigation of the test breach and a March 12, 2019 Internal Affairs Investigation 

Report he prepared within the scope of his duty as a public employee. 

15. 

Under section 11513, subdivision (c), of the Government Code, “[a]ny 

relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the sort of evidence on which responsible 

persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the 

existence of any common law or statutory rule which might make improper the 

admission of the evidence over objection in civil actions.” Special Agent Lee’s March 

12, 2019 Internal Affairs Investigation Report is a public employee record. It is the sort 

of evidence responsible persons are accustomed to relying on in the conduct of 

serious affairs. Lee’s testimony explaining his investigation findings is accorded 

significant weight. 

16. 

Lee’s March 12, 2019 Internal Affairs Investigation Report contains 

statements from persons other than respondent whom Lee interviewed during his 

investigation. Complainant offered those third-person statements to support the 

allegations in the Accusation. Pursuant to subdivision (d) of section 11513, they are 

hearsay evidence insufficient to support a finding of fact but may supplement or 

explain direct evidence. (See 

(1997) 16 Cal.4th 448, 460-462.) Where 

those third-person statements contradict direct evidence, they are accorded 

diminished weight. 

17. 

Respondent’s primary witness was Abril, who exhibited no signs of 

vindictiveness or personal animosity toward respondent. His testimony is accorded 

significant weight. 

25 

18. 

Respondent appeared eager effusively narrating the most minute details 

surrounding the November 29, 2017 test breach, his January 10, 2019 investigatory 

interview, and his November 30, 2017 workplace absence. He testified without 

hesitation or prevarication. Respondent presented as credible. His testimony is 

accorded substantial weight. 

Discussion 

19. 

In paragraph 16 of the Accusation, complainant alleges, “On or about 

December 4, 2017, Respondent wrote a memorandum to the warden of CCCF charging 

Teacher JA [Abril] with inexcusable neglect of duty and insubordination when there 

was no evidence to support these charges. As a result, CCCF referred the matter to the 

Office of Internal Affairs for Investigation [.]”

20. 

In the immediate aftermath of the test breach, respondent reported to 

Deputy Warden Green, who directed him to draft a request for an inquiry into Abril’s 

involvement with the test breach when she learned Abril, unlike others, had not 

submitted a memorandum addressing the test breach when instructed to do so on 

November 29, 2017. Abril prepared what the evidence variously characterizes as a 

draft, an initial statement, or statement, not a memorandum. Respondent complied 

with Green’s directive but not before seeking guidance from Green’s superiors. 

Respondent credibly explained he sought Associate Superintendent Winistorfer’s 

advice because in his judgement an inquiry into adverse action for Abril was 

disproportionate or “too far to go for a test breach as these things are pretty 

common.” On December 1, 2017, two days after the test breach, Abril followed 

respondent’s instructions and submitted a memorandum. An investigation 

subsequently absolved Abril and determined another person’s conduct was 

responsible to the November 29, 2017 test breach. Even with the benefit of hindsight 

26 

and the investigative findings, respondent nonetheless did not engage in misconduct 

when he obeyed his supervisor’s directive. He manifested no personal animus or 

untoward motives to harm professionally a colleague. Complainant failed to prove by 

clear and convincing evidence respondent committed acts constituting unprofessional 

conduct, immoral conduct, and moral turpitude and demonstrated inadequacies 

indicating evident unfitness for service in connection the December 4, 2017 

memorandum. 

21. 

In paragraph 17 of the Accusation, complainant alleges, “On January 10, 

2019 and during an OIA interview of Respondent, Respondent stated that he hand-

delivered a red folder to Lt. E [Espinoza] of the Investigative Services Unit containing 

original documents related to his allegations against Teacher JA. Lt. E was interviewed 

and stated he never received such a red folder from Respondent. On August 1, 2018 

and in a memo to Teacher JA, Respondent again claimed he delivered a red folder to 

Lt. E.” 

22. 

Respondent credible testimony detailed his encounter with Lieutenant 

Espinoza when he was on his way to consult with Associate Superintendent 

Winistorfer. Respondent handed Lieutenant the red folder informing him, “We had a 

test breach and the institution needed to be search.” At the time, respondent was 

implementing CCCF’s standard protocols for managing a test breach. Lieutenant 

Espinosa’s hearsay statements contained in Lee’s March 12, 2019 Internal Affairs 

Investigation Report contradict respondent’s credible testimony he gave the 

Lieutenant the red folder on the day of the test breach and are therefore not credited. 

Complainant failed to prove by clear and convincing evidence respondent committed 

acts constituting unprofessional conduct, immoral conduct, and moral turpitude and 

27 

demonstrated inadequacies indicating evident unfitness for service in connection with 

his statements he delivered a red folder containing documents to Lieutenant Espinoza.

23. 

In paragraph 18 of the Accusation, complainant alleges, “On January 10, 

2019 and during an OIA interview of Respondent, Respondent stated that he called in 

sick on November 30, 2017. Neither Respondent’s supervisor or [

] anyone else at 

Respondent’s employment was informed of the absence by Respondent. When 

Respondent ‘s supervisor emailed asking where he was, Respondent responded stating 

‘en route to SDSU . . . [.]’ Further, Respondent submitted his record of attendance Form 

CDCR998, certifying that all time was correct and accurate, without documenting any 

time off for November 30, 2017. Respondent was paid for that day.”

24.  On November 30, 2017, respondent experienced pain associated with the 

tumor prosthesis placed in his leg. Respondent’s testimony established he informed 

his assistant and Deputy Warden Green at approximately 8 o’clock he would not arrive 

at CCCF for work until 10:00 a.m. Email communications document two hours after 

expiration of respondent’s anticipated 10:00 a.m. arrival at CCCF, respondent’s 

assistant emailed him at 12:39 p.m. stating she last heard from him four hours earlier. 

Her statement corroborates respondent’s testimony at 8 o’clock he provided notice of 

an anticipated two-hour absence on a day he is typically permitted to work a partial 

day ending at 12:00 noon. Green’s parallel email exchange with respondent establishes 

his assistant communicated to her respondent’s plans for work that day. “Your 

secretary indicated you said you were going to be here also???” Respondent’s assistant 

and Deputy Warden Green did not testify at hearing. Special Agent Lee did not 

interview them as part of his investigation. No statements attributed to them were 

offered in evidence. Respondent’s testimony regarding his November 30, 2017 

absence is credible. Respondent’s omission of his November 30, 2017 absence from 

28 

his Form CDCR 998 was inadvertent. Complainant failed to prove by clear and 

convincing evidence respondent committed acts constituting unprofessional conduct, 

immoral conduct, and moral turpitude and demonstrated inadequacies indicating 

evident unfitness for service in connection with his November 30, 2017 absence. 

25. 

In paragraph 19 of the Accusation, complainant alleges “On July 17, 2019, 

adverse action was taken against Respondent dismissing him from his position as 

Supervisor of Correctional Education Program at the CCCF. Pursuant to a settlement 

agreement dated September 25, 2019, CDCR modified the penalty imposed by the 

NOAA from dismissal to a suspension for 90 days.” 

26. 

To the extent the Stipulation and Release constitutes a disciplinary act, by 

its own terms, it is not predicated on any charge or evidentiary finding of dishonesty. 

The CDCR specifically agreed to the removal of allegations charging respondent with 

dishonesty under Government Code section 19572, subdivision (f), as a basis for 

adverse action against respondent. 

27. 

Government Code section 19572, subdivision (f), provides, “Dishonesty 

generally requires a showing of an intentional misrepresentation of known facts, or a 

willful omission of pertinent facts, or a disposition to lie, cheat, or defraud; 

untrustworthiness, lack of integrity.” Consistent with Government Code section 19572, 

subdivision (f), courts recognize dishonesty connotes a disposition to deceive. “It . . . 

denotes an absence of integrity; a disposition to cheat, deceive or defraud[.]” (

. (1970) 5 Cal.App.3d 713, 718-719.) Courts understand 

integrity to mean “‘soundness of moral principle and character, as shown by a person’s 

dealings with others, in the making and performance of contracts, in fidelity and 

honesty in the discharge of trusts. In short, it is used as a synonym for probity, 

29 

honesty, and uprightness in business relations with others.’” (See 

  (1904) 142 Cal. 125, 132 quoting 

 (1891) 88 Cal. 307.) 

28. 

The Stipulation and Release, although a binding contract between the 

CDCR and respondent, avoided an administrative adjudication of the charges alleged 

in the NOAA. Consequently, without more, the NOAA and Stipulation and Release do 

not prove respondent is predisposed to lie, cheat, or defraud or engage in dishonesty 

thereby rendering him unfit to teach. This administrative hearing before the 

Commission is a trial de novo. (Cal. Code. Regs., tit. 5, § 80317.) No competent, 

credible evidence offered during this hearing established respondent was dishonest 

with respect to his December 4, 2017 memorandum to Warden Garza, his January 10, 

2019 OIA investigatory interview, his November 30, 2017 absence from CCCF, his 

submission of a red folder with documents to Lieutenant Espinoza, or his November 

2017 Form CDCR 998. Complainant failed to prove by clear and convincing evidence 

respondent committed acts constituting unprofessional conduct, immoral conduct, 

and moral turpitude and demonstrated inadequacies indicating evident unfitness for 

service in connection the July 17, 2019 NOAA and subsequent September 25, 2019 

Stipulation and Release.

29.

In paragraph 20 of the Accusation, complainant alleges, “In a declaration 

dated January 17, 2020, Respondent stated, ‘CCCF did in fact initiate Adverse Action 

against me in my position as Supervisor of Correctional Education Program for 

allegedly lying about receiving a memo from one of my instructors and turning in a 

red folder to the Investigative Services Lieutenant with required collateral materials. In 

additional [

], on my November Timesheet, I forgot to include November 30, 2017, as 

a day off.’” 

30 

30.

Respondent’s acknowledgement of the CDCR adverse action and charges 

it alleges against him is not proof of any misconduct rendering him unfit to teach.

Respondent’s declaration stating he forgot to include November 30, 2017 as a day off 

on his time sheet is consistent with the credible evidence his oversight was 

inadvertent. Complainant failed to prove by clear and convincing evidence respondent 

committed acts constituting unprofessional conduct, immoral conduct, and moral 

turpitude and demonstrated inadequacies indicating evident unfitness for service in 

connection with his January17, 2020 declaration.

31.

In sum, complainant failed to satisfy its evidentiary burden to prove by 

clear and convincing evidence cause exists pursuant to Code sections 44421 and 

44345 to suspend respondent’s teaching credentials and certification documents for a 

90-day period.

ORDER

The Accusation is dismissed.

DATE:

JENNIFER M. RUSSELL

Administrative Law Judge

Office of Administrative Hearings

31

