BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Accusation and Statement of Issues 

Against: 

CHRISTIAN ROBERT HANSEN, Respondent 

Agency Case No. 2-115932060 

OAH No. 2021100295 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Marion J. Vomhof, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, 

State of California, heard this matter via video and teleconference on March 29, 2022. 

Alan Macina, Deputy Attorney General, Department of Justice, State of 

California, represented complainant, Mary Vixie Sandy, Ed.D., Executive Director, 

California Commission on Teacher Credentialing (CTC). 

Christian Robert Hansen, respondent, represented himself. 

The matter was submitted on March 29, 2022. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Background 

1. 

The CTC is responsible for the credentialing of public-school teachers, 

including issuing credentials and taking adverse action against applicants and 

credential holders. 

investigating alleged acts or omissions that may be cause for the CTC to take adverse 

action. 

private admonition, or public reproval of a credential holder, or the suspension or 

revocation of a credential. (Ed. Code, § 44000.5.) 

2. 

On October 10, 2017, the CTC issued a Certificate of Clearance 

(certificate) to respondent. The certificate will expire on November 1, 2022. On 

October 1, 2018, the CTC issued respondent an Intern Education Specialist Instruction 

Credential (credential). The credential expired on November 1, 2020, and has not been 

renewed. The expiration of any credential does not deprive the CTC from taking 

disciplinary action against the credential. (Ed. Code, § 44440, subd. (a).) 

3. 

On April 1, 2020, the CTC received an application from respondent for a 

Preliminary 5-year Education Specialist Instruction Credential (preliminary credential). 

On March 31, 2020, respondent certified under penalty of perjury to the truthfulness of 

all the statements in the application. That application is pending. 

4. 

At its April 21 through 23, 2021, meeting, as documented in a letter 

dated April 30, 2021, the CTC found probable cause to recommend the revocation of 

credential and certificate. The findings were based on allegations relating 

2 

2020 felony conviction for two counts of conspiracy to commit 

securities fraud. Respondent timely requested an administrative hearing. 

4. 

On September 21, 2021, complainant signed and filed an accusation and 

a statement of issues against respondent. 

The accusation alleged the following as grounds for discipline: unprofessional 

conduct, immoral conduct, moral turpitude, and evident unfitness for service. The 

factual allegations relate to respo

conspiracy to commit securities fraud. Complainant seeks revocation of all credentials, 

certificates, and authorizations issued to respondent. 

credential should be denied because he committed acts of moral turpitude. 

for a preliminary 

In aggravation, complainant alleged that a greater degree of adverse action is 

needed to protect the public, schoolchildren, or the profession because: a) the 

misconduct evidences multiple acts of wrongdoing or demonstrate a pattern of 

misconduct; b) the misconduct was surrounded by or followed by bad faith, dishonesty 

or other violation of the laws governing educators; c) the misconduct significantly 

harmed a child entrusted to the care of a credential holder or applicant, significantly 

harmed the public or the educational system; and d) the holder or applicant 

demonstrated indifference toward the consequence of the misconduct, which includes 

failure to comply with known court orders. 

5. 

Respondent timely filed a Notice of Defense. This hearing followed. 

3 

2020 Felony Conviction 

6. 

On November 4, 2019, in the United States District Court Southern 

District of California in a criminal proceeding entitled 

 no. 3:19-CR-04499-AJB, respondent pled guilty to two counts 

of securities fraud under 18 U.S.C. section 371. In a plea agreement, respondent 

admitted that between 2011 and 2013, he conspired with others to fraudulently sell 

securities, and in 2017, he conspired with others to fraudulently trade securities, 

through which he and his co-conspirators illegally received a total of approximately 

$77,000 in illicit profits. Respondent further agreed to pay mandatory restitution to 

any person directly harmed by his criminal conduct. 

On May 21, 2020, respondent was convicted on his plea of guilty to two counts 

of securities fraud under 18 U.S.C. section 371, both felonies and carrying a maximum 

prison term of five years. Respondent was placed on probation for three years in lieu 

of prison. He was assessed a fine of $100 per count for a total of $200. 

December 21, 2020, Letter to the CTC 

7. 

In a December 21, 2020, letter to the CTC, respondent wrote that on 

November 8, 2019,1 he pled guilty to two counts of violating securities law. In the 

letter, which was received into evidence, respondent provided the following 

information: 

1 Respondent signed the plea agreement on November 4, 2019, but was not 

convicted until May 21, 2020, based on that plea. 

4 

 
8.

Regarding Count One, he was a marketing consultant at an investor 

relations firm. The managing partners directed him to accept and sell shares in client 

companies and direct all sales proceeds back to the managing partners. This was a 

violation of securities law due to the free-trading status of the company's shares 

because they had been given for investor relations purposes. As for Count Two, he 

purchased shares in a publicly 

former CFO. Upon liquidation of the stock, he gave a portion of the proceeds to the 

attorney and to the former CEO. This was a violation of securities law due to his failure 

to disclose to the clearing firm that he had returned the proceeds to the company's 

officers. 

9. 

On April 21, 2021, respondent appeared remotely and provided sworn 

testimony before the CTC. The following was obtained from a transcript prepared from 

this audio-recorded meeting: 

10. 

Respondent was asked if, at the time he engaged in the conduct that led 

to his conviction, he knew that his actions violated securities law. He said with Count 

No. 1, he was not aware 

guidance and ins

When he was asked what the partners 

said to assure him the activities were legal, he did not answer the question but said 

that the partners instructed him to accept the shares in his name, deposit them in a 

brokerage firm, and sell the shares. He was to give them a majority of the money, and 

He found out 

later that it was illegal, and he said,  [t]

5 

 
 
Regarding Count No. 2, he stated:

[T]he purchase of the stock was legitimate; however, . . . the 

security violation was returning the proceeds back to the 

company. 

What I did was I falsely put down to the clearing firm that I 

would not give money back to the company. So I knew that 

a violation and I . . . pled guilty . . . and accepted full 

responsibility for that action. 

11. 

The FBI was trying to obtain more information on the managing partners, 

which he was willing to give them.  was a conduit for the FBI to get to those 

managing partners in that case (Count No.1)

 He will continue to cooperate with the 

U.S. Attorney and the FBI. 

12. 

Respondent was asked how much he personally profited from the activity 

in both cases. He said he was directed to do this  and that this would be my -- my [

] 

 any salary or anything on top of it. It was just a commission, and that was 

He can assure the CTC that this misconduct will not occur again because he has 

been barred from small 

I gave my life to teaching and coaching  

If a parent or student asked him about his conviction, he 

his position as a mentor. He said,  I would be quite frank in doing the right thing and 

6 

 
 
 
not . . . taking shortcuts like I did in Count 2

He has accepted full responsibility for his actions. He said, 

coach and I want to be a 

Respondent Testimony 

13. 

Regarding Count No. 1, 

to 

respondent, but when he learned several years later that this was illegal, he resigned 

from the firm in 2013. The total proceeds were more than $300,000. In his plea 

agreement he admitted he received a gain of $33,000, 

 He received no additional commission. 

Regarding Count No. 2, the CFO received restricted shares, and respondent 

purchased these shares from the CFO. The sale of the shares was legitimate. Referring 

to his plea agreement, respondent said

He 

acknowledged that he deposited the shares into his account and that he made false 

representations that he had not worked with an insider and that he would not share 

the proceeds with the person from whom he acquired the shares. He admitted that not 

registering the shares was illegal. He sold the shares for approximately $77,000 and 

gave $17,000 each to the CFO and the CEO. He had a personal gain of $43,000. 

Respondent said,  This was a shortcut and the wrong thing to do. I am not 

trying to diminish my conduct. I am culpable. I am accepting responsibility for what 

 He had two brokerage accounts but no trading or securities license. The 

7 

 
 
 
Respondent believes he was first contacted by the FBI in Spring 2018. His 

admission of what he had done helped the 

 The criminal case was 

filed in 2019, and he entered his plea in November 2019. 

Respondent was convicted of felony offenses that can carry prison time. He 

received 

 non-supervised probation, which is scheduled to end May 2023. 

He is barred from trading any securities, either over-the-counter (OTC) or through an 

e-Trade account. His banking and computers are monitored. 

personal gain in Count No. 2 was $43,000. He was ordered to pay 

restitution to all affected clients. The clients were notified and provided time to file a 

claim; only 11 claims were received. Respondent is in the process of paying a total of 

$12,520.74 in restitution to those 11 clients. He paid a lump sum initially and is 

currently paying $250 per month. To date, he has paid $8,000 of the restitution. 

In 2015, was hired to coach basketball at Madison High School. He obtained his 

. He received his internship credential in 2018. He was hired 

by the San Diego Unified School District (district) and began teaching special 

education at Garfield High School

 He did 

not initially notify the district of his conviction because he stated that he was not 

required to do so. He did notify the district of his conviction when he applied to the 

CTC for a permanent credential. The principal and vice principal at Garfield High 

School provided character reference letters. He told both authors that he had pled 

guilty to two counts of felony securities violations. No parents or students are aware of 

his conviction. 

Respondent 

anywhere else. He 

He has never had criminal issues 

8 

positive example for kids. He understands that a credential is a privilege, but he said, 

 also confirms that this person is fit to teach kids.  

a teacher needs to set a 

Character Reference Letters 

14. 

Jolie Pickett, Ed.D., is principal at Garfield High School. In a December 18, 

2020, letter, she wrote that respondent has worked at Garfield High School as a special 

education teacher since 2018. All of his evaluations reflect that 

He is currently the Special Education Department Chair and a member of the 

Instructional Leadership Team. He is a very good teacher for his students and a good 

colleague for his peers. Recently when staff were facing cuts, she actively worked to 

ensure respondent could remain as part of the school staff. 

15.  Miriam Atlas is vice principal at Garfield High School. In a December 21, 

2020, letter, she wrote that respondent came to the high school as a new special 

education teacher, and from the beginning he showed leadership skills, as well as 

humility and willingness to learn. He is an expert in mathematics, and not only 

supports students in the classroom but offers afterschool tutoring to assist students 

who are struggling in math. He volunteers as coach for an after-school basketball 

league. He goes above and beyond in service to students; they trust him and look up 

to him. 

16.  Neither author referenced 

conviction, although respondent 

stated that he told each of them that he had been convicted of securities fraud. 

9 

Closing Arguments 

COMPLAINANT 

17. 

This was not an impulsive 

act; it required planning and involved dishonesty and false statements. There were 

actual names of people harmed; respondent is paying back those people. This conduct 

is too serious not to take action. Evidence shows the co-conspirators were immoral 

and their conduct was hostile to the general public. Even if the first serious conduct 

was inadvertent, respondent continued this conduct. 

Moral turpitude is defined in the Education Code as conduct that is contrary to 

honesty, justice, and good morals. 

dishonesty and moral turpitude cover 

a period of years. He testified that he knew he should not do this, but he did it anyway. 

He harmed the public. He falsified documents that were submitted the SEC. There is no 

justification for his actions. 

conduct was not an isolated event but rather a 

pattern of multiple acts, which harmed the public and showed his indifference due to 

repetition. He is held to a high standard as a teacher. He provided verbal assurance 

and character letters, which did not mention his conviction. Although he said the 

authors were aware of his conviction, there is no evidence. 

He was recently convicted and is still on probation for another year. The  clock

showing rehabilitation-- real rehabilitation that is not court mandated-- begins after 

probation has ended. Applying the 

t reflects his 

unfitness for service. 

10 

 
RESPONDENT 

18. 

In 2021, he performed 300 hours of voluntary community service and 

completed 200 hours of professional development. Since his plea he has earned a 

He is a special education teacher. There is a lack of male special 

education teachers. He also co-teaches four classes, so he helps mentor more than 60 

students on a daily basis. In his first year of teaching, he was named Department Chair. 

He completed his seventh year as basketball coach at Madison High School. 

If he does not have his CTC credentials, he will lose his coaching and teaching 

position. His ex-wife is dying, so he will soon be a single parent to his teenage 

daughter. He owes $85,000 in student debt, which will soon be due. He cooperated 

fully with the FBI and did not deny his conduct. 

He was a confidential informant to the FBI. The federal government fined him 

only $100 per count and gave him 

 probation. 

CTC is seeking to give 

me a lifetime ban on being an educator and male mentor. . . I am only asking for a 

second chance.  

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

Burden and Standard of Proof 

1. 

Complainant bears the burden of proof of establishing that the charges 

in the accusation are true. (Evid. Code § 115.) The standard of proof in an 

administrative disciplinary action seeking the suspension or revocation of a 

professional license is clear and convincing evidence. (

r and convincing evidence requires a 

11 

 
finding of high probability, or evidence so clear as to leave no substantial doubt; it 

requires sufficiently strong evidence to command the unhesitating assent of every 

reasonable mind. (

 (2005) 130 Cal.App.4th 586, 594.) 

In the denial of an application, the burden of proof is on the applicant to prove 

by a preponderance of the evidence that his license or credential should be granted. 

 convincing force than 

of the 

evidence. The 

 of evidence presented by each side is 

 (1990) 226 Cal.App.3d 314,324-325.) 

Applicable Education Code Sections 

2. 

Education Code section 44000, et seq., and California Code of 

Regulations, title 5, section 80001, et seq., provide that the CTC is responsible for 

credentialing of public-school teachers, including issuing credentials and taking 

adverse action against applicants and credential holders. 

3. 

Education Code section 44421 states: 

The Commission on Teacher Credentialing shall privately 

admonish, publicly reprove, revoke or suspend for immoral 

or unprofessional conduct, or for persistent defiance of, and 

refusal to obey, the laws regulating the duties of persons 

serving in the public school system, or for any cause that 

would have warranted the denial of an application for a 

credential or the renewal thereof, or for evident unfitness 

for service. 

12 

4.

Education Code section 44246 states:

When a hearing is held to deny, suspend, or revoke a 

credential, the proceeding shall be conducted in 

accordance with Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 

11500) of Part 1 of Division 3 of Title 2 of the Government 

Code, and the commission shall have all the powers granted 

therein. 

5. 

Education Code section 44345 states as follows in part: 

The commission may deny any application for the issuance 

of a credential or for the renewal of a credential made by 

any applicant who falls under any of the following 

categories: 

[¶] . . . [¶] 

(e) Has committed any act involving moral turpitude. . . 

6. 

Under Education Code section 44345, any denial on the grounds of moral 

fitness to perform other duties for which that applicant is certificated, or competence 

(Ed. Code 44345.) 

7. 

Education Code section 44440, states: 

(a) No applicant who is under review by 

the commission shall be allowed to withdraw his or her 

13 

application for a credential without the written consent of 

the commission. The commission shall retain its authority 

over those applicants to proceed with the denial of the 

credential upon any ground provided by law, or to enter an 

order denying the credential upon any ground provided by 

law. 

(b) The suspension or expiration of any credential, its 

surrender without the written consent of the commission, or 

a revocation pursuant to Section 44423 does not deprive 

the commission of its authority to do any of the following: 

(1) Institute or continue a disciplinary proceeding against 

the credential holder upon any ground provided by law. 

(2) Enter an order suspending or revoking the credential. 

(3) Issue a public reproval or private admonition to 

the credential holder. 

Applicable Regulations 

8. 

California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80300, subdivision (b), 

greater degree of adverse action for an act of professional misconduct is needed to 

adequately protect the public, schoolchildren or the profession. These aggravating 

factors may include, but are not limited to, the following: 

[¶] . . . [¶] 

14 

(2) that the misconduct evidences multiple acts of 

wrongdoing or demonstrate a pattern of misconduct; 

(3) that the misconduct was surrounded by or followed by 

bad faith, dishonesty or other violation of the laws 

governing educators; 

(4) that the misconduct significantly harmed a child 

entrusted to the care of a credential holder or applicant, 

significantly harmed the public or the educational system; 

(5) that the holder or applicant demonstrated indifference 

toward the consequence of the misconduct, which includes 

failure to comply with known court orders; 

9. 

California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80302, subdivision (a), sets 

forth the factors used in determining the relationship between the alleged misconduct 

and the applicant's or holder's fitness, competence, or ability to effectively perform the 

duties authorized by the credential. These factors include, but are not limited to: 

(1) The likelihood that the conduct may have adversely 

affected students, fellow teachers, or the educational 

community, and the degree of such adversity anticipated; 

(2) The proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct; 

(3) The type of credential held or applied for by the person 

involved; 

15 

(4) The extenuating or aggravating circumstances 

surrounding the conduct; 

(5) The praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives 

resulting in the conduct; 

(6) The likelihood of the recurrence of the questioned 

conduct; 

(7) The extent to which disciplinary action may inflict an 

adverse impact or chilling effect upon the constitutional 

rights of the person involved, or other certified persons; 

(8) The publicity or notoriety given to the conduct. 

Relevant Case Law 

UNPROFESSIONAL CONDUCT 

10. 

of a profession and is unbecoming a member of a profession in good st

(

(1953) 41 Cal.2d 546, 553, internal quotation marks 

omitted, overruled, in part on another ground in 

(1972) 

6 Cal.3d 575, 588, fn.7.) 

IMMORAL CONDUCT 

11. 

There is broad discretion in determining what constitutes immoral 

conduct in the context of teacher disciplinary matters. (

(1999) 20 Cal.4th 327.) Immoral conduct has been defined by the 

courts as follows: 

16 

[T]hat which is hostile to the welfare of the general public 

and contrary to good morals. Immorality has not been 

confined to sexual matters, but includes conduct 

inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, 

indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; or as willful, flagrant, or 

shameless conduct showing moral indifference to the 

opinions of respectable members of the community, and as 

an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public 

welfare. (

(1970) 9 

Cal.App.3d 967, 972, citing 

, 179 Cal. App 2d 

808, 811.) 

12. 

conjunction with the unique position of public-school teachers, upon whom are 

lities and limitations on freedom of action which do not exist in 

(2011) 194 Cal.App.4th 1454, 1466) [citation omitted].) 

MORAL TURPITUDE 

13.  Moral turpitude has been defined as an act that is contrary to honesty 

and good morals. (

(1991) 52 Cal.3d 968, 978; see also 

(1979) 98 

excuse or any 

17 

 
EVIDENT UNFITNESS FOR SERVICE 

14. 

Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444-

(1969) 2 

conduct fails to 

.) 

RELATIONSHIP TO UNFITNESS TO TEACH 

15. 

Adverse action against a credential is warranted when such misconduct 

demonstrates an unfitness to teach. (

 (1969) 1 

Cal.3d 214, 235 [

].) In 

, the Supreme Court set out seven factors 

relevant to a determination of unfitness to teach: 

affected students or fellow teachers [and] the degree of 

such 

praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives 

18 

 
 
 
 
adverse impact or chilling effect upon the constitutional 

(

[

(

], quoting 

, supra, 1 Cal.3d at p.229.) The Supreme Court later added 

(2010) 184 Cal.App.4th 462, 474. 

(1977) 19 Cal.3d 691, 701, fn.5.) 

Not all the Morrison factors must be considered, only the most pertinent ones. 

 (1993) 16 Cal.App.4th 

1766, 1777.) Additionally, the Morrison factors may be applied to all the charges in the 

aggregate. (

 (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429,1456-1457 (

).) 

For purposes of taking adverse action against a teaching credential, the factors 

enumerated in 

have been codified in regulation. (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 

80302.) 

16. 

In considering the 

 factors relevant to this case in relation to the 

sustained allegations the following conclusions are reached: 

19 

 
 
THE LIKELIHOOD THAT THE CONDUCT MAY HAVE ADVERSELY AFFECTED 

STUDENTS, FELLOW TEACHERS, OR THE EDUCATIONAL COMMUNITY, AND THE 

DEGREE OF SUCH ADVERSITY ANTICIPATED 

17. 

The conduct that led to 

2019 conviction occurred in 2011 

through 2013, and 2017. It was not until 2018 that he obtained his internship 

credential and began teaching at Garfield High School. Based on this time frame, it is 

unlikely that students or the educational community may have been adversely affected 

by his conduct or conviction. Respondent credibly testified that he told his principal 

and vice principal about his conviction, although 

conviction was made in the letters they submitted attesting to his good character. 

PROXIMITY OF THE CONDUCT 

18.  With regard to the proximity of respondent s conduct, the 2011 and 2013 

conduct is relatively remote in time while the conduct in 2017 is more recent. His 

conviction was recent (2020), and he remains on probation through May 2023. 

EXTENUATING OR AGGRAVATING CIRCUMSTANCES 

19. 

In aggravation, respondent testified that he was assured by the partners 

when he was asked 

to specify what assurances he was given, he did not answer the question. He said that 

when he learned that the transactions were illegal, he resigned from the firm in 2013. 

However, in 2017 he again engaged in activity which he acknowledged was illegal. On 

several occasions, he characterized his 

ese descriptions were an attempt to minimize the severity of his conduct. 

20 

 
MITIGATING FACTORS 

20. 

In mitigation, the CTC has never taken adverse action against 

Since the conduct occurred, respondent has earned his 

teaching credential. His is currently 

working as a special education teacher and coach. 

THE PRAISEWORTHINESS OR BLAMEWORTHINESS OF THE MOTIVES 

RESULTING IN THE CONDUCT 

21. 

There is nothing praiseworthy about 

conduct. His motives 

were purely financial, and he knew his actions were illegal at least in 2017 pursuant to 

his own admission. Accordingly, his motives were blameworthy. 

THE LIKELIHOOD OF THE RECURRENCE OF THE CONDUCT IN QUESTION 

22. 

It is unlikely that this misconduct will occur again because respondent 

has been barred from trading securities. 

Analysis and Disposition 

23. 

Complainant established by clear and convincing evidence that cause 

exists for 

 and certificate pursuant to 

Education Code section 44421, because respondent committed acts of unprofessional 

conduct and immoral conduct when he violated securities laws and received $77,000 

in illegal share sales proceeds from the conduct underlying his conviction for securities 

fraud. 

21 

24.

Complainant did not establish by clear and convincing evidence that 

respondent committed acts of moral turpitude, thereby subjecting his credential and 

certificate to disciplinary action pursuant to Education Code section 44421. 

25. 

The above analysis of the 

 factors does not demonstrate a 

perform the duties authorized by his credential and certificate. 

Teachers are in a unique position in that they are responsible for the care and 

training of young minds. They are role models to their students in and out of the 

classroom. We expect teachers to be honest and trustworthy. 

Licensing disciplinary matters like this are not designed to punish an individual. 

(

 (1979) 95 Cal.App.3d 161, 165.) Rather, a licensing agency should 

be primarily concerned with protecting the public. (

(1995) 38 Cal.App.4th 810, 817.) In this regard, rehabilitation is an important 

consideration. (

 (1981) 29 Cal.3d 120, 124-125.) 

26. 

credential, but not revocation. Respondent established a satisfactory level of 

rehabilitation and permitting him to continue teaching in the classroom would not be 

inconsistent with public protection provided that a period of probation in imposed 

22 

 
probation for a period of five years.2 

ORDER 

The application of respondent Christian Robert Hansen for a Preliminary 5-year 

Education Specialist Instruction Credential (preliminary credential) is hereby granted. 

All teaching credentials and certificates issued to respondent Christian Robert Hansen, 

including his preliminary credential, are hereby revoked. However, the revocation is 

immediately stayed, and his credentials and certificates are placed on probation for a 

period of five years on the following terms: 

Severability Clause. Each condition of probation contained herein is a separate 

and distinct condition. If any condition of probation, or any application thereof, is 

declared unenforceable in whole, in part, or to any extent, the remaining conditions of 

probation, and each of them, and all other applications thereof, shall not be affected. 

Each condition of probation shall separately be valid and enforceable to the fullest 

extent permitted by law. 

1. 

Obey all Laws. Respondent shall obey all federal, state, and local laws and 

regulations, including, but not limited to, the statutes and regulations of the CTC. A full 

and detailed account of any and all arrests or citations for any violation of law (except 

2 The commission has never promulgated disciplinary guidelines although 

proposed disciplinary guidelines have been drafted. 

23 

 
minor traffic offenses) shall be reported by respondent to the commission, in writing 

within 30 days of the arrest or citation. 

2. 

New Credentials Subject to Order. Any new credential issued by the CTC 

to respondent during the period of probation shall be subject to this order, and 

respondent shall be subject to the same terms and conditions of probation with 

respect to any such new credentials, as set forth herein. 

3. 

Compliance with Probation. Respondent shall fully comply with the terms 

and conditions of this order and cooperate with representatives of the CTC in its 

monitoring and investigation of his compliance. 

Respondent shall submit quarterly reports, under penalty of perjury, in a form 

designated by the CTC, certifying and documenting compliance with all terms and 

conditions of probation. Respondent shall execute release of information forms that 

may be reasonably required by the CTC or its representatives. 

4. 

Cooperation with CTC. During the entire period of probation, respondent 

shall fully cooperate wit

compliance with probation. 

5. 

Interviews/Meetings with CTC. During the period of probation, 

respondent shall appear in-person or be available by telephone at interviews or 

meetings as directed by the CTC or its representatives upon reasonable notice. 

6. 

Notifications. The CTC shall be informed, in writing, of all employment of 

respondent that requires a credential. Respondent shall inform his employer of the 

reason for, and the terms and conditions of his probationary status and shall provide a 

his employer and immediate supervisor. Respondent 

24 

shall authorize his employer to submit performance evaluations and other reports 

requested by the CTC. Respondent shall notify the CTC in writing within 72 hours after 

cessation of any employment that requires a credential. The notification shall contain a 

full explanation of the circumstances surrounding the cessation of employment. 

7. 

Maintain Active, Current Credentials. During the entire period of 

probation, respondent shall maintain active, current credentials with the CTC. 

8. 

Maintain Current Contact Information. Respondent must provide written 

notice to the CTC within 10 days of any change of residency or address. Periods of 

residency outside of California shall not apply toward completion of the probationary 

period or period of suspension. 

9. 

Probation Monitoring Costs. Respondent shall pay the costs associated 

with probation monitoring, as designated by the CTC, for each year of probation. 

Probation monitoring costs shall be made payable to the California Commission on 

Teacher Credentialing. Within 30 days of the effective date of this order, respondent 

shall pay the CTC the prorated probation monitoring costs for the number of months 

remaining in the calendar year. Beginning with the second year of probation, the full 

year of probation monitoring costs shall be paid to the CTC on or before January 31st 

of each calendar year. The total probation monitoring costs for each calendar year may 

be adjusted by the CTC on an annual basis. 

10. 

Violation of Probation

case during the period of probation. If respondent violates any term or condition of 

this Order, after giving his written notice and an opportunity to be heard on the issue 

of his violation of probation, the CTC may set aside the stay order and impose the 

25 

is filed against respondent during probation, the probation period shall automatically 

be extended until a final decision is made on the accusation or petition.

11.

Completion of Probation. Upon successful completion of the terms of 

ly restored.

DATE: May 6, 2022

MARION J. VOMHOF

Administrative Law Judge

Office of Administrative Hearings

26

