BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Accusation and 

Statement of Issues against: 

ELIA CISNEROS, aka ELVIA DUENAS, Respondent. 

Agency Case No. 1-992950672 

OAH No. 2021080119 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Howard W. Cohen, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings 

(OAH), State of California, heard this matter remotely by video and teleconference on 

January 18 and 19, 2022. 

Lisa A. Miller, Deputy Attorney General, appeared on behalf of complainant May 

Vixie Sandy, Ed.D., Executive Director of the California Commission on Teacher 

Credentialing (Commission). 

Seth A. Weinstein, Attorney at Law, represented respondent Elia Cisneros, also 

known as Elvia Duenas, who was present. 

Oral and documentary evidence was received. The record was held open to 

permit additional evidence to be submitted by January 26, and objections to be filed 

by February 2, 2022. 

The record was closed, and the matter was submitted for decision on February 

2, 2022. 

SUMMARY 

In the Accusation, complainant seeks to revoke respondent’s teaching credential 

for unprofessional conduct, immoral conduct, and acts of moral turpitude. 

Complainant based those causes for discipline on allegations that respondent sent a 

letter, purporting to be from a new elementary school principal, to the parents of 

students at that school, revealing the principal’s sexual orientation and implying that 

he is a pederast. In the Statement of Issues, complainant seeks to deny respondent’s 

application for a credential with an  authorization in English for the same alleged acts 

of moral turpitude. 

Respondent denies having sent the letter. 

As set forth below, complainant has satisfied the clear and convincing burden of 

proof. Respondent’s credential is revoked and her application denied. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Jurisdiction 

1. 

On December 3, 2003, the Commission issued a Clear Multiple Subject 

Teaching Credential to respondent. The credential was in full force and effect at all 

relevant times and is scheduled to expire on January 1, 2024. Respondent also 

previously held the following certification documents: a Special Temporary Certificate 

issued on September 5, 2003, that expired on October 1, 2005; a Certificate of 

2 

Clearance issued on March 24, 2000, that expired on April 1, 2005; an Emergency 30-

Day Substitute Teaching Permit issued on September 1, 2003, that expired on October 

1, 2004; and a Pre-Intern Certificate issued on August 25, 2000, that expired on 

September 1, 2003. 

2. 

On November 19, 2018, the Commission received respondent’s 

application to add an authorization in English to her Clear Multiple Subject Teaching 

Credential. 

3. 

On April 2, 2021, complainant filed and served an Accusation and 

Statement of Issues while acting in her official capacity. Respondent filed a notice of 

defense. 

The English Language Learners Services Department 

4. 

At all relevant times, respondent was employed as a teacher at 

Bakersfield City School District (District). During the 2016-2017 academic year, 

respondent was an academic coach for the District, in the English Language Learners 

(ELL) Services Department (Department). 

5. 

During the 2016-2017 academic year, Erick Casallas was the 

Department’s Supervisor. Mr. Casallas supervised the four academic coaches and other 

staff in the Department. 

6. 

Each academic coach in the Department was assigned to different District 

school sites. For part of the 2016-2017 academic year, respondent was the academic 

coach responsible for Voorhies Elementary School (Voorhies). Academic coaches spent 

part of their time in the office, but spent most of their day visiting the school sites for 

which they were responsible, to support principals, teachers, and students. Coaches 

3 

sometimes sent letters to parents of students at the school sites for which they were 

responsible. 

7. 

The Department was located in an open-design office space that also 

housed the Curriculum and Instruction Department, the Migrant Education Services 

Department, and the Family and Community Engagement Department. Across the 

hallway from the large office was a smaller office housing the Gifted and Talented 

Education Department (G&T Department), which employed a clerk, an administrator, 

and others. 

8. 

There were no cubicles in the large office space housing the Department. 

Each academic coach and each secretary was assigned a desk, or workstation, with a 

computer. Each staff member created their own confidential computer login name and 

password. Although each computer was assigned to a specific Department employee, 

any Department employee could, using their own login information, log onto any of 

the Department’s computers. On the Department’s computers, coaches and secretaries 

could generate labels for mailings to parents of students at particular school sites. 

9. 

Office supplies in the large office space and in the smaller G&T 

Department office were stored in unlocked cupboards. The G&T Department’s office 

supplies included envelopes pre-printed with the name and address of the department 

in the return address area of the envelope. Those envelopes were accessible to any 

Department staff member. 

10. 

In early 2017, the District informed Mr. Casallas that the Department 

would be dissolved and that he would be reassigned to the position of Principal of 

Voorhies. The Department’s four academic coach positions and the program specialist 

position would be eliminated, and the four coaches—Susanne Icardo, Jane Ferdinand, 

4 

Holly Hinh, and respondent—and program specialist Courtney McMahan, would be 

permitted to apply for District teaching positions. 

The Letter 

11.  On November 27, 2017, the District learned of a letter sent by U.S. mail 

to parents of students at Voorhies (the letter). The letter, which appeared to be signed 

by Principal Casallas, was in Spanish, in Calibri 11-point font, and was mailed in a 

District envelope stamped with the Gifted and Talented Education Department return 

address. The letter introduced Mr. Casallas to the parents of his new school and 

included the following, which, translated into English, reads: 

I would like to share some things with you before taking 

this new role. First of all, I AM GAY and I have lived with my 

partner (a man) for many years. For this reason, I LOVE boys 

and mostly because I will have them very close to me. I 

hope that this will not be a problem with you. If you feel 

that this will be a problem for you, please come to the 

board meeting this June 27th at 6pm in the board room of 

the Bakersfield School District, 1300 Baker Street (next to 

Taqueria Los Tucanes). The parents have the right to 

express their opinion. I am happy to meet you personally at 

this meeting as well as your children. [¶] Sincerely, Erick 

Casallas. 

(Ex. 5, p. A62.) 

5 

12. 

Included with the letter was a copy of a photograph obtained from Mr. 

Casallas's partner’s Facebook and Snapchat page. On the back of the envelope was a 

label with the District’s superintendent’s telephone number. 

13.  On the day the District learned of the letter, Dr. Diane J. Cox, Assistant 

Superintendent of Human Resources, and Erin Johnston, District Human Resources 

Coordinator, spoke to Mr. Casallas about the matter. Mr. Casallas told Dr. Cox and Ms. 

Johnston that, over the week-long Thanksgiving holiday in November 2017, Jayme 

Cook, a teacher at Voorhies with a daughter attending Voorhies, contacted him and 

informed him and sent him a screen shot of the letter, received by mail on November 

24, 2017. 

14.  Mr. Casallas told Dr. Cox and Ms. Johnston he did not send the letter and 

did not have any prior knowledge of its preparation. He said he had learned the letter 

was being distributed not only by mail but by text messages and on Facebook, and 

that he was collecting the letters and envelopes parents brought to the school office. 

Some of the envelopes were sent to former Voorhies students who were, in November 

2017, attending middle school. 

15.  Mr. Casallas told Dr. Cox and Ms. Johnston that the parents who 

approached him about the matter said they did not believe he created and sent the 

letter; they were primarily concerned that someone had access to their addresses and 

possibly other personal information. 

Evidence of Respondent’s Authorship 

16. 

Complainant attempted to demonstrate that respondent must have sent 

the letter by introducing evidence that respondent had a motive and the opportunity 

6 

to do so and that no one else employed in the Department did. Everyone employed in 

the Department in 2017 testified. 

EVIDENCE FROM THE FORMER ASSISTANT DIRECTOR OF INFORMATION 

TECHNOLOGY 

17. 

Robert Burks, the District’s Director of Information Technology (IT) for the 

past seven months, was the Assistant Director of IT in 2017. As Assistant Director, Mr. 

Burks was responsible for the District’s data systems. He testified that then-IT Director 

John Deaton told him letters were sent to students at Voorhies Elementary School and 

asked him to determine who created the labels. Mr. Deaton did not tell Mr. Burks to 

determine who wrote the letter. 

18.  Mr. Burks conducted an investigation and reported back to Mr. Deaton in 

an email dated Monday, November 27, 2017. His findings in and accompanying that 

email, and his testimony at hearing, are summarized here. 

19.  Mr. Burks reviewed an image of the envelope and label used to send one 

of the letters. In 2017, the District used the CompleteSchool student information 

system (SIS); programs in the SIS could generate labels. The labels used to send the 

letter were in the Arial font, the font the SIS used for most of its labels. Mr. Burks 

found an unusual feature of the labels, however, “[a]ssuming the SIS was used to 

produce the labels.” (Ex. 5, p. A215.) Students’ parents’ names were listed in the order 

of first name, middle name, and last name. Most label programs available in the SIS 

produce labels that list names in the order of last name, first name, middle name; there 

were only four methods for printing labels in the format used for the letter.

7 

20. 

“The text used in and recipients of the letter also suggests the labels 

were actually created using the 2016/2017 Voorhies enrollment information.” (Ex. 5, p. 

A215.) 

21.  Mr. Burks ascertained which programs could have generated the labels 

he was asked to investigate. Then he ascertained that only three employees’ logins 

had been used to run those programs: Chris Holloway, an IT Department database 

administrator who was testing the system in early 2017; a second man, whom Mr. 

Burks could not remember when he testified at this hearing; and respondent. 

22. 

The SIS keeps a record of every time a report is run, including the date 

and time and the user whose login was entered to run the report. Mr. Burks created a 

spreadsheet listing labels in the format used for the letter, produced using 2016/2017 

school year information, limited to logins of users assigned to Voorhies as well as to 

users who could generate labels that do not automatically limit the student list to 

students enrolled at the user’s schools settings. Mr. Burks listed 35 label reports found 

using those parameters. He sent the spreadsheet to Mr. Deaton. 

23. 

The spreadsheet shows that, on April 27, 2017, someone using 

respondent’s login information logged into the system and ran ELL Student Mailing 

Labels, ELL District Student Mailing Labels, and District ELL Student Program 

Designation Data Reports. (Ex. 5, pp. A215-A219.) 

24. 

The spreadsheet also shows that, on May 18, 2017, someone using 

respondent’s login information logged into the system and ran a schoolwide student 

address label report. This report only runs when the user specifies that the labels are 

to be sent to parents of students at a particular school. (Ex. 5, pp. A215-A219.) 

8 

25. 

For both the April 27 and May 18, 2017 reports, “school 50” was selected. 

That school is Voorhies. (Ex. 5, pp. A215-A219.) 

26.  Mr. Burks found it likely that the SIS was used to generate the labels 

because the label font was Arial, not any other commonly used font, and because the 

letter’s salutation is “To Parents/Guardians,” a common salutation in programs using 

the SIS. Though the first name, middle name, last name format is not used in most 

programs in the SIS, it is available in some of those programs. 

27.  Mr. Burks is very confident the May 18, 2017 labels are the ones on the 

envelopes mailed to the Voorhies parents in November 2017. 

28. 

Label reports can be generated and saved on the desktop of the person 

who logged in, or in an email or on a USB drive, and the labels can be printed at a later 

date. Thus, label reports prepared in April or May 2017 could have been used to print 

labels later in the year. Mr. Burks acknowledged that label reports generated earlier or 

later than April 27, 2017, could have been used for the mailers mailed in November 

2017. Anyone creating the report used to generate the labels would have been able to 

access the 2017 school year student information on the SIS. 

29. 

Respondent’s login was used to prepare labels on May 18, 2017, close to 

the date the school year ended, June 1, 2017. Mr. Burks does not know whether an 

academic coach would have reason to generate labels so late in the school year. 

30.  Mr. Burks examined the envelopes used for the November 2017 letter 

mailing. The envelopes were stamped with the Gifted and Talented Department title 

and address. He concluded they must have been stored with that department’s 

envelope supplies. 

9 

31.  Mr. Burks did not investigate the computers in the Department office. He 

did not investigate who had access to respondent’s login information, or who had 

access to the envelopes.

32.  Mr. Burks’s evidence supports the conclusion that respondent’s login and 

password were used to generate the labels to send the letter. But because anyone 

possessing respondent’s login could use any computer in the Department to generate 

the labels, Mr. Burks acknowledged he does not know to a certainty that it was 

respondent who generated the labels. 

EVIDENCE FROM DEPARTMENT EMPLOYEES ABOUT LETTERS, LABELS, AND 

COMPUTER USE 

33. 

The academic coaches who worked with respondent in 2017, Jane 

Ferdinand, Susanne Icardo, and Holly Hinh, the instructional specialists, Claudia 

Maldonado and Brandon Ware, the program specialist, Courtney McMahan, the 

Department secretary, Linda Villalpando, and the Department Clerk, Tina Mendez, each 

testified that Department employees had their own logins and passwords. Some 

testified, without contradiction, that there was a policy against sharing that 

information and that they did not share their login information with anyone. Almost all 

testified respondent never shared her login information with them; none of them knew 

whether respondent shared it with the others. Anyone with a login and password 

could log onto any of the computers in the Department using their own login 

information. But all testified they never used respondent’s computer workstation, they 

know of no other employees who did, and it was very uncommon and not generally 

appreciated for an employee to use a computer assigned to another employee.  

10 

34. 

The coaches all prepared letters to families of students from time to time.

Most of the coaches testified they did not prepare labels for the letters they prepared; 

the Department secretaries or clerk would do that when requested. But Ms. Villalpando 

and Ms. Mendez, the secretary and clerk, as well as Ms. McMahan, the program 

specialist, contradicted that testimony. Ms. Mendez testified neither she nor Ms. 

Villalpando ran label reports for any of the coaches. Ms. Villalpando and Ms. Mendez 

testified respondent never asked them to run a label report. Ms. McMahan testified it 

was common for coaches to run labels for their own school sites. Ms. Maldonado 

testified she saw respondent printing labels or letters for parents on a couple of 

occasions. 

35. 

Even if it could be established that coaches sometimes asked the 

secretary or clerk to create label reports, Ms. Maldonado testified that coaches did not 

have to share their login information when doing so, because the secretaries had their 

own logins and could access the same name and address data as everyone else in the 

Department.  

36. 

All Department staff—coaches, specialists, secretary, and clerk—denied 

sending the November 2017 letter. 

37.  On the whole, the evidence establishes that coaches could and at times 

did prepare their own letters and labels for mailings to the parents of students at 

schools to which they were assigned. There was no need for a coach to share her login 

information with the secretary or clerk if seeking assistance creating labels. There is no 

evidence on this record to support the conclusion that any employee in the 

Department, apart from respondent, created the letter or the envelope labels for the 

letter. 

11 

EVIDENCE OF RESPONDENT PRINTING AND PHOTOCOPYING DOCUMENTS IN  

MAY-JULY 2017 

38.  Ms. Hinh testified that there was no reason for an academic coach to 

send a letter to parents on May 18, 2017, a date very late in the academic year. (See 

Factual Finding 29.) Reclassification of ELL students, when those students no longer 

require support and are considered sufficiently proficient to achieve California 

standards, occurs before that date. Any letter at such a late date would, therefore, 

concern some administrative matter and would be sent over Mr. Casallas’s signature. It 

would not have been a coach’s responsibility. 

39.  Ms. Maldonado and Ms. McMahan testified they saw respondent in the 

Department office once, in June or early July 2017, after June 8, when respondent’s 

Department position was eliminated. 

40.  Ms. Maldonado testified she saw respondent enter the Department office 

after working hours with a rolling cart. Respondent worked at her computer, printed 

labels at her printer, and made “a huge” number of photocopies on the Department 

copier. Ms. Maldonado did not see the contents of what respondent was printing or 

copying. Ms. Maldonado testified respondent was upset when she saw her and asked 

Ms. Maldonado why she was still there at that time of day. Ms. Maldonado thought it 

strange that respondent was in the office and texted Ms. McMahan about it; Ms. 

McMahan was also in the office. Ms. McMahan responded that respondent had no 

reason to be there and suggested Ms. Maldonado document it, but Ms. Maldonado 

testified she too busy to do so. 

41.  Ms. Maldonado, however, asked the coordinator of the Migrant 

Education Services Department, where respondent was going to work during the 

12 

summer, whether respondent was making copies for them. The coordinator said she 

was not. This corroborates the District’s summary of a December 6, 2017 interview with 

the head of that department, who confirmed that respondent’s only duty that summer 

was to supervise students, not to prepare mass mailings or photocopies. 

42.  Ms. McMahan testified that she and Ms. Maldonado had returned to the 

Department office to run copies after giving a professional development session. She 

testified the photocopy machines were running and respondent was sitting at her old 

desk. Ms. McMahan did not speak to respondent or see what she was copying or 

printing. Ms. McMahan reported respondent’s presence to Mr. Casallas, but did not 

document it. 

ADDITIONAL EVIDENCE OF RESPONDENT’S POSSIBLE AUTHORSHIP OF THE 

LETTER

43.  No one in the Department saw respondent write the letter, print the label 

reports, take 600 envelopes from the District office, or mail the letter. 

44. 

After the letter was sent and publicized, Ms. McMahan visited 

respondent’s Facebook page and found November 20, 2017 photographs of 

respondent and, apparently, family members at the Moby Dick Restaurant in Santa 

Barbara. The letter was mailed from Santa Barbara and postmarked on November 22, 

2017. Ms. McMahan provided screen shots of the photographs to the District. (Ex. 7, 

A260-A262.) Ms. McMahan knew the letters were not mailed from Bakersfield, she 

testified, because she had seen the envelopes of some of the letters that had been 

returned to the Department office. Ms. McMahan testified she suspected respondent 

sent the letter because it was apparent respondent did not get along with Mr. Casallas 

and was upset about having to reapply for a position, and she was in Santa Barbara in 

13 

November 2017. There were “visible issues” in the office between Mr. Casallas and 

respondent. Respondent often appeared upset and resisted following Mr. Casallas’s 

directions. Ms. McMahan testified she did not know anyone who disliked Mr. Casallas 

other than respondent. 

45. 

Tina Mendez, a clerk in the Department in 2017 who has now been 

employed by the District for almost 18 years, testified there was some animosity 

between respondent and Mr. Casallas. She believes one issue of contention was 

whether coaches should be required to teach as substitutes. Respondent corroborated 

this testimony. (See Factual Finding 60.) Ms. Mendez testified that the letter was in a 

font respondent liked to use, and that respondent would capitalize words for 

emphasis, a feature of the letter. Ms. Mendez recalls no other employees having any 

problem with Mr. Casallas. 

46. 

The Department employees who addressed the subject testified 

respondent was the only employee who had a difficult relationship with Mr. Casallas. 

DISTRICT’S CONCLUSIONS 

47. Ms. Johnston and Dr. Cox spoke with Mr. Casallas, who told them he 

thought the letter may have been written by respondent because she and he had a 

troubled professional relationship and had not interacted well during the previous 

months. He testified he does not have many enemies and generally has good 

professional relationships. Ms. Johnston did not consider whether candidates other 

than Mr. Casallas for the Voorhies principal position might have prepared and sent the 

letter. 

48.  Ms. Johnston concluded the letters were printed at the Department 

office; she saw no evidence that they were printed offsite. The District did not compare 

14 

the April and May 2017 labels with labels respondent had previously printed for her 

mailings to ascertain whether they were similar; Ms. Johnston testified the District was 

not in possession of earlier-printed labels. The letter, dated November 20, was typed in 

Calibri 11.5, a standard default Word font. Ms. Johnston testified she cannot 

definitively identify respondent as the author of the letter because she did not see 

respondent type it or mail it and she never discovered any eyewitness who did. 

Attempts to obtain fingerprints from the letters were unsuccessful. Ms. Johnston 

knows of no one who saw respondent take the envelopes from the G&T Department 

cabinet. 

49.  Ms. Johnston testified respondent was in Santa Barbara around the time 

the letters were mailed, and the letters had a Santa Barbara postmark dated November 

22, 2017. Ms. Johnston visited the Santa Barbara post office and learned that the 

letters had been dropped in a mailbox; Ms. Johnston did not learn whether there was 

video surveillance at the mailbox. Respondent was in Santa Barbara sometime during 

the Thanksgiving week holiday, which in 2017 was from Monday, November 20, to 

Friday, November 24. Ms. Johnston did not know whether respondent was there on 

Thanksgiving weekend, from Thursday, November 23, to Sunday, November 26. 

50.  Ms. Johnston in summary testified she is confident respondent prepared 

and sent the letter because the evidence showed respondent was the most likely 

person to have done so, she was in Santa Barbara at around the time the letter was 

mailed, she had a motive, the other employees interviewed provided information 

strongly tending to show respondent created the labels and sent the letter, and IT 

confirmed it must have been she who created the labels. 

51.  On December 28, 2017, respondent was charged in Kern County Superior 

Court with misdemeanor theft and embezzlement of the District’s paper, labels, and 

15 

envelopes. On September 21, 2018, the District Attorney’s Office dismissed the case.

Respondent resigned from the District four days later, on September 25, 2018; she 

testified she believed the District filed criminal charges against her to force her off its 

payroll. 

RESPONDENT’S EVIDENCE

52. 

Respondent testified that she did not write, print labels for, or mail the 

letter. Respondent disputed running label reports or photocopying significant number 

of documents between June 8 and August 31, 2017, or taking envelopes from a District 

office. 

53. 

Respondent was in the office on the afternoon of April 27, 2017, but does 

not recall whether she ran a label report on that date. She testified she might have run 

one, or she might have asked Ms. Mendez, Ms. Villalpando, or Ms. Ferdinand to do it; 

she would give them her login information when they asked for it. This testimony is 

not credible. First, in her interview with the District, respondent did not identify Ms. 

Mendez as someone she shared her password with. Second, those witnesses testified 

that respondent never gave them her password. Third, in any event, those employees 

would not have needed respondent’s password to create labels for her schools, as they 

had their own logins and had access to the database. 

54. 

Respondent testified that the testimony of Ms. Mendez, Ms. Villalpando, 

and Ms. Ferdinand about her providing them with her login information is false. 

55. 

Respondent testified she was made aware of the mailing on the Monday 

after Thanksgiving, November 27, 2017. Dr. Cox showed respondent the envelope, 

though not the letter. Respondent told Dr. Cox that the envelope was not familiar, it 

was a Gifted & Talented Education Department envelope. 

16 

56.  On June 8, 2017, respondent left the Department, but she still had access 

to the Department office. That summer, respondent worked as a coordinator for the 

Migrant Education Services program, Jamie Flores, Director, at the District’s Pioneer 

Elementary School. Respondent went back to the Department office on July 25, 2017, 

to interview for a position as an academic coach for the Family and Community 

Engagement (FACE) program. She denied ever being in the Department office on any 

other day that summer. She testified that Ms. McMahan and Ms. Maldonado, who 

both testified they saw her there, were “absolutely” lying, and that she was out of the 

country when they claim to have seen her. During the cross-examination of Ms. 

McMahan, after being instructed to stop shaking her head at the testimony, 

respondent said, “She’s such a liar, such a puppet for the District.” At the end of 

respondent’s testimony, near the close of the hearing, respondent apologized for her 

outburst. 

57. 

In 2017, respondent had a week off for Thanksgiving. She planned to 

travel to Baja California with her brother to meet their uncle. That plan did not work 

out, so respondent visited her sister in Ventura instead, arriving on Sunday, November 

19. On Monday, November 20, respondent testified, she left her children with her 

sister and went to a medical clinic in Santa Barbara. She returned to her sister’s home 

the same day and spent the night there. Respondent did not explain why the 

photographs posted on social media appear to place her and her family in Santa 

Barbara on November 20, not with her sister in Ventura. 

58. 

Respondent testified that the next day, Tuesday, November 21, at around 

5:00 or 6:00 p.m., she left her sister’s home, drove back to Bakersfield, and spent 

Thanksgiving with her husband. 

17 

59. 

The following Monday, November 27, 2017, respondent testified, she was 

interviewed by Dr. Cox and Michael Lukey. They asked what she did during 

Thanksgiving week. The District’s summary of the interview, which Ms. Johnston 

prepared, shows that respondent said she visited her uncle in Baja California, then 

visited her sister in Ventura, and did not return to Bakersfield until Saturday, 

November 25. Respondent testified at this hearing that she told the interviewers she 

had visited her sister in Santa Barbara; she did not understand that her sister actually 

lives in Ventura. Ms. Johnston testified that respondent never mentioned Santa 

Barbara in her November interview, and the interview summary correctly reflects that. 

Respondent testified at this hearing that Ms. Johnston was lying about that and about 

other things. Respondent testified she also told the interviewers she had planned to 

visit Baja California, but that she visited her sister instead, and that she never told them 

she returned to Bakersfield after Thanksgiving. 

60. 

The interviewers asked about respondent’s relationship with Mr. Casallas. 

She said it was cordial, that she had nothing against him, and that she would not write 

a letter impugning him. But at hearing, respondent acknowledged her relationship 

with Mr. Casallas “took a tumble” in January or February 2017, because of substitute 

teaching assignments that caused her to have to cancel her ELL parent workshops. 

Respondent also addressed Mr. Casallas’s testimony about a letter of reference she 

had obtained from him. 

61.  Mr. Casallas wrote a letter of recommendation for respondent in 2015. In 

April 2017, he testified, he attempted to rescind the letter due to his issues with her 

integrity, specifically, his belief she overreported how long she spent at school sites, 

and what he felt were job performance inconsistencies. The Human Resources 

Department told him respondent had submitted a reference letter from him dated 

18 

only two weeks earlier. Mr. Casallas testified it was the 2015 letter, but respondent had 

altered the date. 

62. 

Respondent testified that, in 2017, she wanted to use Mr. Casallas’s 2015 

letter to apply for some jobs. Ms. Stout, in the Human Resources Department, 

suggested she date the 2015 letter with the current 2017 date. On April 26, 2017, Dr. 

Cox told respondent Mr. Casallas said she had fraudulently written the 2015 letter. She 

testified she “was floored.” 

63.  On April 27, 2017, the day immediately following respondent’s 

conversation with Dr. Cox, respondent’s login was used to print a series of label 

reports for Voorhies. (See Factual Findings 23-25.) 

64. 

Respondent testified the November interviewers showed her the 

envelope the letter was mailed in, but did not show her the letter, which she did not 

see until this administrative proceeding. On cross-examination, respondent testified 

that the November interviewers may have tried to show her the letter, but she only 

remembers the envelope. Then she testified she saw the letter at her second interview, 

in December 2017. 

65. 

Respondent told the November interviewers she often prepared label 

reports, and might have created labels for Voorhies, but had no specific memory of 

doing so. According to the interview summary, when told a mass production of labels 

showed up on her computer, respondent complained about security at her 

workstation. 

66.  On December 6, 2017, respondent was called for a second interview. Her 

union lawyer, Mr. Tuttle, was present, as were the District’s attorney, Mr. Sahbani, Dr. 

Cox, and Erin Johnston. She told the interviewers, according to the District’s interview 

19 

summary, that during her trip to Ventura to visit her sister, she also visited a medical 

clinic in Santa Barbara. The December 6 interview summary Ms. Johnston prepared 

reflects that the interviewers asked respondent if she had ever returned to the 

Department office after June 8. At this hearing, respondent did not recall being asked 

that and testified that the interview summary is inaccurate and that Ms. Johnston 

jumbled what respondent said.

67. 

Respondent testified that at both the November and December 

interviews, Ms. Johnston misunderstood what she was saying and on numerous 

occasions failed to write what respondent actually said, and that what Ms. Johnston 

wrote, and her testimony at this hearing, “is absolutely false.” 

68. 

Respondent testified she feels very bad for what was done to Mr. 

Casallas. She denied that he ever told her he is gay. She testified she saw photographs 

of his daughters on his desk and assumed he was married. 

69. 

In sum, respondent testified that all the Department employees lied 

under oath. She disputed the testimony of Ms. Mendez, Ms. Villalpando, and Ms. 

Ferdinand. She testified that Ms. McMahan lied, that Ms. Villalpando lied, that Ms. 

Maldonado lied, and that Ms. Johnston lied. Her testimony about the subjects covered 

in the November and December 2017 interviews was inconsistent and confused. 

Respondent’s uncorroborated testimony alone has not raised sufficient doubt to refute 

what appears to be clear and convincing evidence. 

70. 

That evidence supports the conclusion that respondent planned the 

letter and ran label reports in April and May 2017, printed the letter and envelopes in 

June or July 2017, and mailed the letter in November, when she was in Santa Barbara. 

That it took seven months to bring this scheme to conclusion does not make it less 

20 

likely, given the events apparently precipitating the scheme occurred in the spring of 

2017, near the end of the academic year, and it was known Mr. Casallas, like the other 

Department employees, would start his new positions after the summer break, at the 

beginning of the next academic year. 

Mitigation and Rehabilitation

71. 

Respondent denied writing the letter and offered no evidence of 

mitigation or rehabilitation.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

Applicable Law 

1. 

Under the Education Code, commencing with section 44000, and 

California Code of Regulations, title 5, commencing with section 80000, the 

Commission is responsible for credentialing teachers in public schools in California, 

including issuing credentials and taking adverse action against applicants and 

credential holders. “Adverse action” includes the suspension or revocation of a 

credential or the private admonition or public reproval of a credential holder. (Ed. 

Code, § 44000.5; Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80300, subd. (a).) 

2. 

The Commission “shall” take adverse action against an individual’s 

teaching credentials for immoral or unprofessional conduct, or for evident unfitness 

for service, or for any cause which would have warranted the denial of an application 

for a credential or renewal of a credential. (Ed. Code, § 44421.) The Commission may 

revoke the credential of a teacher “for immoral or unprofessional conduct . . . or for 

any cause that would have warranted the denial of an application for a credential or 

21 

the renewal thereof, or for evident unfitness for service.” (Ed. Code, § 44421.) One 

cause that may warrant the denial of an application is if the applicant “[h]as committed 

any act involving moral turpitude.” (Ed. Code, § 44345, subd. (e).) 

3. 

“The term ‘immoral’ has been defined generally as that which is hostile to 

the welfare of the general public and contrary to good morals. Immorality . . . includes 

conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, 

dissoluteness; or as wilful, flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral indifference 

to the opinions of respectable members of the community, and as an inconsiderate 

attitude toward good order and the public welfare. [Citation.]” (

 (1951) 36 Cal.2d 734, 740; see also 

 (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811 (

).) 

4. 

“Unprofessional conduct” has been described as “‘that which violates the 

rules or ethical code of a profession or such conduct which is unbecoming a member 

of a profession in good standing.’” (

(1953) 41 Cal.2d 546, 553, quoting 66 Corpus Juris 55, overruled in part on 

another ground in 

 (1972) 6 Cal.3d 575, 587, fn. 7.) For 

example, conduct that produced serious friction in the school and showed a teacher’s 

insubordination and refusal to conform to the instructions and requirements of 

superiors has been held to be unprofessional conduct. (

(1937) 19 Cal.App.2d 405, 407.) 

5. 

“Moral turpitude is a concept that ‘defies exact description’ [citation] and 

‘cannot be defined with precision’ [citation].” (

 (2014) 58 Cal.4th 469, 475-

476.) “Our Supreme Court has defined moral turpitude as ‘an act of baseness, vileness 

or depravity in the private and social duties which a man owes to his fellowmen, or to 

society in general, contrary to the accepted and customary rule of right and duty 

22 

 
between man and man.’ [Citation.] Moral turpitude has also been described as any 

crime or misconduct committed without excuse, or any ‘dishonest or immoral’ act not 

necessarily a crime. [Citation.] The definition depends on the state of public morals 

and may vary according to the community or the times, as well as on the degree of 

public harm produced by the act in question. [Citation.]” (

 (1990) 224 Cal.App.3d 1016, 1027; see also 

 (2018) 31 Cal.App.5th 262, 281; 

 (1979) 98 

Cal.App.3d 167, 185.) Moral turpitude has also been described as the “‘general 

readiness to do evil.’ [Citation.]” (

 (2009) 180 Cal.App.4th 447, 458.) 

6. 

For purposes of teacher discipline, conduct cannot be characterized as 

immoral, unprofessional, or involving moral turpitude unless it indicates a teacher is 

unfit to teach. (

 (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 229 

(

).) In making this determination, the Commission may consider such matters 

as: “(1) The likelihood that the conduct may have adversely affected students, fellow 

teachers, or the educational community, and the degree of such adversity anticipated; 

[¶] (2) The proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct; [¶] (3) The type of 

credential held or applied for by the person involved; [¶] (4) The extenuating or 

aggravating circumstances surrounding the conduct; [¶] (5) The praiseworthiness or 

blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the conduct; [¶] (6) The likelihood of the 

recurrence of the questioned conduct; [¶] (7) The extent to which disciplinary action 

may inflict an adverse impact or chilling effect upon the constitutional rights of the 

person involved, or other certified persons; [¶] (8) The publicity or notoriety given to 

the conduct.” (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80302, subd. (a); 

, supra, 1 Cal.3d at p. 

229.) Not all 

 factors need be examined, only the pertinent ones. (

 (1993) 16 Cal.App.4th 1766, 1777.) 

23 

7. 

The Accusation also alleges evident unfitness for service. Evident 

unfitness for service properly means “clearly not fit, not adapted to or unsuitable for 

teaching, ordinarily by reason of temperamental defects or inadequacies. [Fn. 

omitted.]” (

 (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444 (

).) This cause for discipline 

connotes a “fixed character trait, presumably not remediable merely on receipt of 

notice that one’s conduct fails to meet the expectations of the employing school 

district.” (

.) On this cause for discipline, the criteria for unfitness in 

“must 

be analyzed to determine, as a threshold matter, whether the cited conduct indicates 

unfitness for service. [Citation.] If the 

 criteria indicate unfitness to teach, the 

next step is to determine whether the ‘unfitness’ is ‘evident’; i.e., whether the offensive 

conduct is caused by a defect in temperament. (

, supra, 2 Cal.App.4th at p. 

1445.) For instance, a teacher’s removal of school property (a public address system 

speaker) from the classroom wall may be considered evidence of evident unfitness for 

service. (

Cal.App.3d 967, 973.) 

 (1970) 9 

8. 

Because this case involves a professional license, the burden of proof is 

on complainant to establish cause for adverse action by clear and convincing evidence 

to a reasonable certainty. (

 (1982) 135 

Cal.App.3d 853, 855-856.) This means the burden rests with complainant to offer proof 

that is clear, explicit, and unequivocal, “so clear as to leave no substantial doubt” and 

“sufficiently strong to command the unhesitating assent of every reasonable mind.” (

 (1990) 224 Cal.App.3d 478, 487; citations omitted.) 

24 

Cause for Credential Discipline and for Application Denial

9. 

Cause exists to take adverse action against respondent’s credential under 

Education Code section 44421 for unprofessional conduct, as set forth in Factual 

Findings 4 through 71. 

10. 

Cause exists to take adverse action against respondent’s credential under 

Education Code section 44421 for immoral conduct, as set forth in Factual Findings 4 

through 71. 

11. 

Cause exists to take adverse action against respondent’s credential under 

Education Code section 44421 and 44345, subdivision (e), for committing acts of moral 

turpitude, as set forth in Factual Findings 4 through 71. 

12. 

Cause exists to deny respondent’s application for an authorization in 

English for her credential under Education Code section 44345, subdivision (e), for 

committing acts of moral turpitude, as forth in Factual Findings 4 through 71. 

13. 

All admissible evidence and applicable statutes and regulations, including 

the 

 factors, have been considered. Complainant established by clear and 

convincing evidence that respondent engaged in unprofessional, immoral conduct and 

committed an act of moral turpitude by sending the letter. The misconduct adversely 

affected the educational community; it was not remote in time; there were no 

extenuating circumstances surrounding the conduct; the motive for the conduct is 

blameworthy; there is a likelihood the questioned conduct could recur; there is no risk 

of a chilling effect upon the constitutional rights of the person involved; and the 

conduct received extensive publicity and notoriety. Respondent accepted no 

responsibility for her conduct. She could not explain the convincing body of evidence 

25 

on this record, but argued the unlikely position that almost every witness but she lied 

under oath. 

ORDER 

The Clear Multiple Subject Teaching Credential issued to respondent Elia 

Cisneros, also known as Elvia Duenas, is revoked. Respondent’s application to add an 

authorization in English to her Clear Multiple Subject Teaching Credential is denied.

DATE: 

HOWARD W. COHEN 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings

26 

 
 
