BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Accusation Against: 

CYNTHIA UJU SIMIEN, Respondent 

Agency Case No. 2-71013055 

OAH No. 2021040735 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Tiffany L. King, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings 

(OAH), State of California, heard this matter by telephone and videoconference on 

September 14, 2021, from Sacramento, California.

Brent O. Jex, Deputy Attorney General, represented complainant Mary Vixie 

Sandy, Executive Director, Commission on Teacher Credentialing (Commission).

Justin L. Ward, Attorney at Law, represented respondent Cynthia Uju Simien, 

who was present. 

Oral and documentary evidence was received. The record was closed and the 

matter submitted for decision on September 14, 2021. 

SUMMARY

Complainant seeks to revoke respondent’s Child Development Site Supervisor 

permit on the grounds that she had multiple inappropriate interactions with students 

and other staff in her Head Start classroom, and that she fell asleep in the classroom 

and later denied it. Respondent denied the allegations. Complainant failed to prove 

the charging allegations by clear and convincing evidence. Therefore, the Accusation 

must be dismissed. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1. 

On June 10, 2010, the Commission issued a Child Development Site 

Supervisor Permit (permit) to respondent. The permit was in full force and effect at all 

times relevant to this matter and will expire on July 1, 2025, unless renewed or 

revoked.1 The permit authorizes respondent: 

. . . to supervise a child care and development program 

operating at a single site; provide service in the care, 

development, and instruction of children in a child care and 

development program; and serve as a coordinator of 

1 On June 25, 2009, the Commission issued a Child Development Associate 

Teacher Permit to respondent. That permit expired on July 1, 2014. 

 

2

curriculum and staff development in a child care and 

development program.2 

Background 

2. 

Respondent was employed by the Stanislaus County Office of Education 

(COE) for approximately 10 years, beginning as a substitute teacher and later 

becoming a permanent employee. In 2018 and 2019, respondent worked as an 

infant/toddler educator at Muncy Early Head Start (Muncy) in Modesto. The students 

in respondent’s classroom ranged in age from 18 months to four years old. 

3. 

Nicole Rivalta (Rivalta) is a registered behavior technician (RBT) employed 

by Kendall Therapeutic Pathways (Kendall), a County vendor. At all times relevant to 

this matter, and for approximately one year, Rivalta was assigned to assist E.W., a 

three-year old student with special needs in respondent’s classroom. Rivalta also 

provided in-home sessions with E.W. and regularly consulted with her parents. Rivalta 

was not assigned to assist any other students in respondent’s classroom; her sole role 

was to stay with E.W. and help her in and around the classroom. 

4. 

On April 16, 2019, Rivalta made a report to her supervisor, Cynthia 

Owens (Owens), wherein she alleged respondent had been overly aggressive and 

physical with multiple students in her classroom earlier that day. Owens memorialized 

Rivalta’s allegations in a letter and submitted it to the COE. The COE subsequently 

investigated Rivalta’s allegations and substantiated them. On May 10, 2019, Jason 

Maggard (Maggard), Assistant Superintendent of Human Resources, signed and issued 

2 See the Commission’s website, 

 

https://www.ctc.ca.gov/credentials/leaflets/child-development-permits-(cl-797).

3

to respondent a Preliminary Notice of Statement of Charges for Dismissal (Statement 

of Charges).

5. 

In November 2020, the Commission determined probable cause existed 

to discipline respondent’s permit based, in large part, upon the COE’s investigation. 

Respondent timely requested an evidentiary hearing. Accordingly, on February 18, 

2021, complainant signed and filed the Accusation against respondent, seeking to 

discipline her permit on the grounds that she engaged in immoral and unprofessional 

conduct, and is unfit for service while employed as a preschool teacher at a Head Start 

program. Specifically, complainant alleged that respondent: (1) directed an aide not to 

change a student’s soiled diaper; (2) was angered and made a homophobic comment 

when she observed a male student wearing a dress; (3) lifted a student with special 

needs by one arm, carried her across the room, and forcibly sat her down; (4) fell 

asleep in the classroom while in charge of students; and (5) denied falling asleep when 

questioned about it. In aggravation, complainant alleges respondent’s actions 

demonstrate a pattern of misconduct; her misconduct involved bad faith or 

dishonesty; her actions significantly harmed a child trusted to her care as well as the 

public or educational system; and respondent has demonstrated indifference toward 

the consequences of her actions. Respondent timely appealed. This hearing followed. 

Incidents on April 16, 2019 

STUDENT A.S. 

6. 

On April 16, 2019, around 10:00 a.m., respondent was on her break and 

Vera Loboda (Loboda), associate teacher, was covering for her in the classroom. A

male student, A.S., began playing “dress up” and donned a costume dress over his 

regular clothes. “Dress up” play was a common student activity, and male students had 

4

often put on costume dresses. A few minutes later, Loboda started to prepare the 

students to go outside, and lined the children up by the door. Respondent re-entered 

the classroom and saw that A.S. was still wearing the costume dress. As students were 

not allowed to take costumes outside, respondent walked over to A.S. and removed 

the dress from his person. 

7. 

Loboda witnessed this interaction. Although she thought respondent had 

removed the dress “kind of roughly,” she did not believe there was anything to report 

as A.S. was not injured or crying. Rivalta was also in the classroom at the time and 

witnessed the interaction. She later claimed that after respondent removed the dress, 

she said to Rivalta that she hoped A.S. “did not end up gay.” Respondent denied the 

allegations and Loboda did not hear her make any such comment. 

STUDENT E.W. 

8. 

Later that same day, just before the lunch hour, respondent directed the 

students it was “clean up time” in the classroom. Rivalta’s student, E.W., was sitting on 

the floor and did not start cleaning up immediately. According to Rivalta, respondent 

walked over to E.W., grabbed her by the arm and raised her to her feet, then walked 

her across the classroom to a chair where she forcibly sat the child down. E.W. began 

to cry. Rivalta tried to walk to her, but respondent stopped her and said E.W. was 

“acting like a baby” and respondent was “handling it.” Rivalta did not attempt to 

intervene again. Rivalta did not report the incident to anyone right away as she did not 

believe E.W. was in any immediate danger. Instead, she reported it to her supervisor at 

the end of her shift.

9.

Rivalta also reported the alleged incident to E.W.’s parents, who in turn 

reported the matter to Child Protective Services and the Modesto Police Department. 

5

When an officer interviewed respondent, she denied having any physical contact with 

E.W. The officer filed an incident report and closed the matter without any action taken 

against respondent. 

RIVALTA REPORT

10.

On April 16, 2019, at the end of her shift, Rivalta spoke with her 

supervisor, Owens, and reported respondent’s conduct she had observed earlier that 

day. Specifically, Rivalta reported the “dress up” incident with a male student and 

respondent’s physical handling of E.W. during clean-up time.

11. 

Rivalta also reported a third incident, alleging respondent used verbal 

and physical force against a male student, N.B., who had not followed instructions. 

Specifically, Rivalta alleged respondent grabbed N.B. by the upper arm and forcibly sat 

him down in a chair, and “flicked” his forehead with her finger and thumb to force him 

to remain seated.3 Per Owens’ memorandum, this incident took place before 

respondent’s alleged physical handling of E.W.

12.

Owens memorialized Rivalta’s allegations in a memorandum, also dated 

April 16, 2019. At hearing, Rivalta testified about the first two incidents. However, she 

could not recall the third incident with N.B., notwithstanding having reviewed Owens’ 

memorandum to refresh her memory.

3 The description of the incident in Owens’ memorandum differed significantly 

 

from how the incident is alleged in the Accusation, including an allegation the incident 

started with the student throwing a block at respondent. 

6

SLEEPING INCIDENT

13.

The Accusation alleged that respondent was observed to be asleep in her 

classroom on April 16, 2019. However, as discussed below, no direct evidence was 

offered to establish this allegation. On April 15, 2019, respondent was absent from 

work as she was not feeling well. Her supervisor, Shawnda Pombo (Pombo) checked 

with respondent to see if she were feeling better and if she would be at work the next 

day, April 16. Respondent confirmed she planned to attend work, but notified Pombo 

that she had arranged for a substitute teacher to relieve her at 2:00 p.m., as she had an 

appointment. At no time did Pombo instruct respondent that she was required to 

report to work on April 16, 2019. 

COE Interview 

14. 

The COE initiated an investigation into Rivalta’s allegations. As a result, 

respondent was placed on paid administrative leave on April 16, 2019. 

15.

On April 25, 2019, Superintendent Maggard met with respondent in his 

office to discuss her classroom conduct on April 16, 2019. Also present were two 

representatives, Terri Stone and Dianne Warner, from respondent’s union. Respondent 

denied Rivalta’s allegations.

16.

Superintendent Maggard then informed respondent that staff4 also had 

observed her sleeping in the classroom on April 16, 2019. Respondent denied the 

allegation. She stated she had been sick that day, and that she may have placed her 

4 At hearing, Superintendent Maggard could not name the staff members who 

 

reported this allegation to him, though he believed it was a Kendall employee.

7

head down on the table for a brief moment after she had taken some medication. She 

also showed Superintendent Maggard the text messages with Pombo to show she was 

not feeling well that week. Superintendent Maggard believed respondent was implying 

that Pombo had “forced” her to report to work on April 16, despite being sick. 

17. 

Superintendent Maggard signed the Statement of Charges against 

respondent on May 10, 2019. The Statement of Charges alleged respondent was 

grossly insubordinate or negligent, caused a potential clear and present danger to her 

students or others, and was dishonest. Specifically, the Statement of Charges alleged 

five instances of misconduct: (1) dress-up and homophobic incident; (2) inappropriate 

physical contact with student E.W.; (3) inappropriate physical contact with male 

student; (4) sleeping in the classroom; and (5) dishonesty during the COE interview 

regarding sleeping in the classroom and being forced to report to work when she was 

sick. Respondent resigned from her position, effective June 13, 2019. Her last physical 

day at the Muncy campus was April 16, 2019. 

Diapering Incident 

18. 

The Accusation alleged an additional incident not included in the COE’s 

Statement of Charges. On an unspecified date in March 2019, respondent, Rivalta, and 

a substitute teacher were working in respondent’s classroom. At hearing, Rivalta 

testified about a “small altercation” she witnessed between respondent and the 

substitute. According to Rivalta, a student had soiled his diaper with diarrhea. The 

substitute began to lead the student to the changing area to change his diaper. 

Respondent instructed the substitute to wait until after the students’ lunch time was 

over. The substitute disregarded respondent and changed the student’s diaper. 

8

19.

At hearing, Rivalta could not remember the name of the student or 

substitute teacher. She did not report the incident to her supervisor or anyone else at 

the time, nor was there any evidence that anyone had reported such an incident had 

occurred at that time. No other witnesses testified about the incident. There was no 

evidence to establish when Rivalta reported the allegation to either Kendall, the COE,

or the Commission, or how it came to be included in the Accusation. 

20. 

In a letter dated May 10, 2020, respondent prepared a written rebuttal to 

each of the allegations contained in the Statement of Charges. She testified at hearing 

Respondent’s Evidence 

consistent with this account. 

STUDENT A.S. 

21. 

Respondent explained that A.S. had been her student for some time and 

she had observed him play dress-up with dresses on multiple occasions without 

incident. She has never prevented or discouraged a student from playing with any of 

the dress up clothes during “free play” time, regardless of gender. However, the 

costumes are to remain in the classroom and not go outside. On April 16, 2019, as the 

students were lining up to go outside, respondent returned from her break and 

observed some of the students were still wearing dress-up costumes. She reminded 

the students that the costumes remain in the classroom. A.S. asked her to help him 

take off the dress, which respondent did. She did not tell A.S. it was inappropriate to 

wear a dress because he is a boy, nor did she make any homophobic comment to 

Rivalta or anyone else.

9

STUDENT E.W.

22.

Respondent denied she had ever been “physically or verbally abusive 

with any student,” including E.W. Respondent pointed out that Rivalta, as E.W.’s RBT, 

was required to be with or near E.W. at all times throughout the school day. If 

respondent had physically assaulted E.W., Rivalta would have intervened. Furthermore, 

there was no evidence E.W. had visible injuries, marks, discoloration, bruises or sores 

anywhere on her body. Finally, the police investigated the incident and did not 

substantiate the allegation. 

STUDENT N.B. 

against respondent.

SLEEPING INCIDENT 

23. 

Respondent denied that she ever used physical force to make N.B. sit 

down, or that she flicked his forehead with her finger. She again noted the lack of 

visible injury or other markings on the student. This allegation was also investigated by 

the Modesto Police Department and the matter closed without any action taken 

24. 

Respondent denied that she was ever asleep in the classroom while on 

duty. Consistent with her prior statements, she explained she had not been feeling well 

and may have rested her head briefly on the table when no students were present. 

DISHONESTY 

25. 

Respondent denied that she was dishonest with Superintendent Maggard 

when she stated she had not fallen asleep in class. She also denied making any 

suggestion that Pombo had forced her to work on April 16 when she was sick. 

10 

PRIOR CONFLICT WITH RIVALTA

26.

Respondent explained that she and Rivalta did not have a good working 

relationship, and that she had several issues with Rivalta’s conduct in the classroom. 

For instance, Rivalta repeatedly brought her cell phone or tablet and charged it in the 

classroom, leaving cords within easy reach of the students. A supervisor inspected the 

facility and noted the exposed cord, and Rivalta blamed another staff member. On 

multiple occasions, Rivalta removed E.W. from the classroom without notifying 

respondent or changing the “magic number” on the door.5 

27.  On the morning of April 16, 2019, the date of Rivalta’s complaint, the 

students were playing outside. One student was riding a bicycle and Rivalta was 

talking with him. Rivalta then pulled the student off the bicycle, causing him to fall. The 

student began to cry, but Rivalta ignored him. Respondent went to the student, picked 

him up and checked for any injuries. The student stopped crying. Rivalta told 

respondent that the student did not listen and “needed to be tamed.” Respondent 

informed Rivalta that she would file an incident report. 

A few minutes later, the class returned to the classroom for meal time. Rivalta 

began serving food to herself before the students had washed their hands. 

Respondent told Rivalta it was inappropriate to eat the children’s food or take food 

home from the facility. Respondent had given Rivalta this admonition several times 

previously.

5 Respondent explained the “magic number” indicated how many students were 

 

present in the classroom at any given time, which helped the facility ensure all 

students were accounted for. 

11 

Respondent never filed an incident report regarding the bicycle. She explained 

the report was still in the classroom when she was placed on administrative leave by 

Jewelee Hotchkiss (Hotchkiss), director of child family services. At that time, Hotchkiss 

directed respondent not to contact any staff while the investigation was pending. 

Accordingly, respondent did not inform Pombo or anyone else at Muncy about the 

unfiled incident report in the classroom. 

28. 

Respondent resigned from her position while the investigation was 

pending. She was “stressed out,” devastated, and could not concentrate. Although she 

had been with COE for 10 years with no issues and no parent complaints, no one 

seemed to listen to her. 

CHARACTER EVIDENCE 

29. 

Respondent introduced several character letters from fellow teachers and 

supervisors. The letters generally describe respondent as an exceptional teacher who is 

an asset to her students and classroom. They extoll respondent’s good working 

relationship with parents and gentle demeanor with students. She is further described 

as empathetic, supportive, professional, and a good listener.

Analysis 

INCIDENTS WITH STUDENTS 

30. 

Complainant offered Rivalta’s testimony only to establish the alleged 

incidents with students A.S., E.W., and N.B. For the reasons discussed below, Rivalta’s 

testimony regarding these events is not credited.

31. 

Evidence Code section 780 sets forth factors to consider in determining 

the credibility of a witness: the demeanor and manner of the witness while testifying; 

12 

the character of the testimony; the capacity to perceive at the time the events 

occurred; the character of the witness for honesty; the existence of bias or other 

motive; other statements of the witness that are consistent or inconsistent with the 

testimony, the existence or absence of any fact to which the witness testified; and the 

attitude of the witness toward the proceeding in which the testimony has been given. 

32. 

The trier of fact may “accept part of the testimony of a witness and reject 

another part even though the latter contradicts the part accepted.” (

 (1973) 9 Cal.3d 51, 67.) The trier of fact may also “reject part of the 

testimony of a witness, though not directly contradicted, and combine the accepted 

portions with bits of testimony or inferences from the testimony of other witnesses 

thus weaving a cloth of truth out of selected material.” (

., at 67-68, quoting 

 (1958) 161 Cal.App.2d 762, 767.) Finally, the fact finder may reject the 

testimony of a witness, even an expert, although not contradicted. (

(1971) 3 Cal.3d 875, 890.)

33. 

Rivalta could not recall the incident with N.B., even after she reviewed 

Owens’ memorandum summarizing her report and even though the incident 

purportedly took place on the same day as the those alleged with A.S. and E.W. 

Moreover, the physical interaction between respondent and N.B., which Rivalta 

allegedly described to Owens, had similarities to the incident she described between 

respondent and E.W. In both cases, Rivalta alleged respondent physically grabbed the 

child and forcibly sat them down in a chair. It is improbable that Rivalta could recall 

specifically the incident with E.W., but have no memory of a similar incident with 

another student that allegedly occurred a short time earlier. As there is no other direct 

evidence to establish this incident occurred, the allegation must be dismissed. 

13 

34.

Rivalta’s testimony regarding the incident with E.W. is also problematic. 

Rivalta testified that respondent raised E.W. by her arm until she was off the ground, 

then roughly sat her down in a chair. Even though E.W. was Rivalta’s sole charge, she 

did not intervene immediately when she saw respondent purportedly handle E.W. in a 

rough manner. When E.W. began to cry, Rivalta walked over to her but immediately 

stepped away when respondent told her to leave it alone. Despite believing 

respondent had harmed the child, Rivalta did not report the incident to anyone that 

morning. Rather, she waited until the end of her shift. Rivalta is a mandated reporter, 

required to report immediately any instances of suspected child abuse. Despite having 

supposedly witnessed two incidents, very close in time to one another, wherein 

respondent physically manhandled two students, Rivalta did not take any action to 

stop the abuse nor report to anyone immediately. For these reasons, her version of 

events that took place that day is suspect and is not credited. 

35. 

Finally, Rivalta’s testimony regarding the dress-up incident with A.S. is 

contradicted by other credible evidence. Both respondent and Loboda testified that 

students frequently dress-up in costumes available in the classroom, and often wore 

costumes that were not traditionally ascribed to their presumed genders. Respondent 

has observed A.S. wear dresses before and did not interfere. Respondent and Loboda 

also both confirmed that while dress-up costumes inside the classroom were 

permitted and frequent, the costumes were not allowed to be taken outside. Loboda 

observed respondent remove the dress from A.S. Although she described it as 

“roughly,” she did not believe respondent had crossed a line or caused harm to A.S. 

Loboda also never heard respondent comment that she hoped A.S. did not turn out 

gay. Because Loboda was lining up the children to go outside, she was in closer 

proximity to respondent and A.S. than Rivalta was, and would have heard the 

comment if respondent had made it. 

14 

36.

Complainant must establish the charging allegations by clear and 

convincing evidence. This means the evidence must be highly and substantially more 

likely to be true than untrue, and the fact finder must be convinced the contention is 

highly probable. (

(1984) 467 U.S. 310, 315-16.) Complainant 

offered Rivalta’s testimony only, which was too unconvincing to meet this higher bar. 

Therefore, the allegations regarding respondent’s interactions with students A.S., E.W., 

and N.B. on April 16, 2019, must be dismissed. 

DIAPERING INCIDENT

37. 

Complainant failed to introduce sufficient evidence to establish the 

diapering incident occurred. First, Rivalta’s testimony was the only direct evidence 

offered regarding the event. She could not remember the name of the student nor the 

substitute teacher involved. She did not report the incident close in time to when it 

allegedly occurred, nor did she include it in her report to Owens when she reported 

the April 16, 2019 allegations. There was no evidence that Rivalta reported the incident 

at all. It was not included in the Statement of Charges brought by COE against 

respondent. Nor was it established how complainant learned of the allegation to 

include it in the Accusation. For all of these reasons, the allegation was not established 

by clear and convincing evidence and must be dismissed. 

SLEEPING INCIDENT AND DISHONESTY

38. 

Complainant offered Maggard’s testimony to establish that respondent 

was sleeping in the classroom on April 16, 2019. However, Maggard did not personally 

observe respondent sleeping. Nor could he recall which staff had reported the alleged 

incident to him, only that he thought it was someone from Kendall. Rivalta was the 

15 

only Kendall employee assigned to respondent’s classroom; she did not testify at all 

about the sleeping incident. 

39.  Maggard was also the only witness who testified regarding respondent’s 

alleged dishonesty during the COE interview. However, his testimony was inadequate 

to meet the clear and convincing evidence standard. First, Maggard accused 

respondent of lying when she denied the allegations Rivalta lodged against her. As 

explained earlier, Rivalta’s testimony was not reliable or sufficient to establish the 

incidents actually occurred. Second, Maggard accused respondent of implying that 

Pombo had “forced” her to report to work on April 16, 2019, despite feeling sick. 

However, the evidence does not bear this out. The text messages respondent showed 

to Maggard establish that Pombo had followed up with respondent to see if she was 

feeling better, and that respondent confirmed she would report to work on April 16, 

2019. There was no indication that respondent was forced to report to work while sick. 

Even if respondent had given an indication that she felt obligated to report to work 

that day rather than stay home sick, that does not rise to the level of dishonesty such 

that discipline is warranted. 

40. 

For all of these reasons, the allegations of sleeping in the classroom and 

dishonesty were not established. Therefore, they must be dismissed. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Complainant bears the burden of proving the allegations contained in 

the Accusation by clear and convincing evidence. (

(1982) 135 Cal.App.3d 853.) “Clear and convincing evidence” requires a 

16 

finding of high probability. It must be sufficiently strong to command the unhesitating 

assent of every reasonable mind. (

(1984) 152 Cal.App.3d 1189.) 

2. 

Education Code section 44421 authorizes the Commission to take 

adverse action against a credential or certificate of one who has engaged in immoral 

or unprofessional conduct, persistently defied or refused to obey the laws regulating 

the duties of persons serving in the public school system, demonstrated evident 

unfitness for service or for any cause that would have warranted the denial of an 

application for, or a renewal of, a credential. 

3. 

Pursuant to Education Code section 44345, subdivision (e), the 

Commission may deny an application for a credential if the applicant has “committed 

any act involving moral turpitude.” The term “immoral” has been defined generally as 

that which is hostile to the welfare of the general public and contrary to good morals. 

Immorality has not been confined to sexual matters, but includes conduct inconsistent 

with rectitude, or that is indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; 

or as willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral indifference to the opinions 

of respectable members of the community, and as an inconsiderate attitude toward 

good order and the public welfare. (

 (1951) 36 Cal.2d 

734, 740.) The phrase “unprofessional conduct” is conduct such as to indicate unfitness 

(1983) 149 Cal.App.3d 

to teach. (

1167, 1174.)

4.

“Evident unfitness for service” means clearly not fit, not adapted to or 

unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of temperamental defects or 

inadequacies. Unlike “unprofessional conduct,” “evident unfitness for service” connotes 

a fixed character trait, presumably not remediable merely on receipt of notice that 

17 

one’s conduct fails to meet professional standards. (

(1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444.)6

5. 

Education code section 49001 states: 

(a) For the purposes of this section "corporal punishment" 

means the willful infliction of, or willfully causing the 

infliction of, physical pain on a pupil. An amount of force 

that is reasonable and necessary for a person employed by 

or engaged in a public school to quell a disturbance 

threatening physical injury to persons or damage to 

property, for purposes of self-defense, or to obtain 

possession of weapons or other dangerous objects within 

the control of the pupil, is not and shall not be construed to 

be corporal punishment within the meaning and intent of 

this section. Physical pain or discomfort caused by athletic 

competition or other such recreational activity, voluntarily 

engaged in by the pupil, is not and shall not be construed 

to be corporal punishment within the meaning and intent of 

this section.

(b) No person employed by or engaged in a public school 

shall inflict, or cause to be inflicted corporal punishment 

6 Because complainant did not prove the charging allegations by clear and 

 

convincing evidence, it is unnecessary to discuss the 

factors regarding 

unfitness to teach. (

(1969) 1 Cal.3d 214.)

18 

upon a pupil. Every resolution, bylaw, rule, ordinance, or 

other act or authority permitting or authorizing the 

infliction of corporal punishment upon a pupil attending a 

public school is void and unenforceable.

Cause for Discipline

6.

As set forth in the Factual Findings as a whole, and particularly Factual 

Findings 29 through 39, complainant did not establish by clear and convincing 

evidence that respondent engaged in the allegations listed in the Accusation. 

Therefore, there is no cause under Education Code section 44421 to impose discipline 

against respondent’s permit.

The Accusation against Cynthia Uju Simien is DISMISSED.

DATE: October 27, 2021

TIFFANY L. KING

Administrative Law Judge

Office of Administrative Hearings

ORDER

19

