BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Accusation Against: 

MICHAEL NEELY COLEN, Respondent 

Agency Case No. 2-35355040 

OAH No. 2021070055 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Danette C. Brown, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings 

(OAH), State of California, heard this matter by videoconference on November 30 and 

December 1, 2021, from Sacramento, California. 

Brent O. Jex, Deputy Attorney General, represented complainant Mary Vixie 

Sandy, Ed.D, Executive Director of the California Commission on Teacher Credentialing 

(Commission). 

Kena C. Cador, Attorney at Law, Beeson, Tayer & Bodine represented Michael 

Neely Colen (respondent). 

Evidence was received, the record closed, and the matter submitted for decision 

on December 1, 2021. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Jurisdictional Matters 

1. 

On January 12, 2016, the Commission issued to respondent a Preliminary 

Single Subject Teaching Credential (credential). The credential expired on February 1, 

2021.1 

2. 

Respondent previously held the following credentials: 

(a) 30-day Substitute Teaching Permit, issued January 4, 2016, and expired on 

February 1, 2017; 

(b) Intern Single Subject Teaching Credential, issued on December 5, 2013, and 

expired on January 1, 2016; 

(c) 30-day Substitute Teaching Permit, issued on October 1, 2013, and expired 

on October 1, 2014; 

(d) 30-day Substitute Teaching Permit, issued on September 13, 2012, and 

expired on October 1, 2013; 

(e) 30-day Substitute Teaching Permit, issued on August 25, 2011, and expired 

on September 1, 2012; 

1 The expiration of any credential does not deprive the Commission of instituting 

a disciplinary proceeding, issuing an order revoking the credential, or issuing a public 

reproval or private admonition against the credential holder. (Bus. & Prof. Code, § 

44440, subd. (b).) 

2 

 
(f) 30-day Substitute Teaching Permit, issued on May 7, 2010, and expired on 

June 1, 2011; 

(g) 30-day Substitute Teaching Permit, issued on February 1, 2009, and expired 

on February 1, 2010; and, 

(h) 30-day Substitute Teaching Permit, issued on January 8, 2008, and expired 

on February 1, 2009. 

3. 

On May 21, 2021, complainant signed and thereafter filed the instant 

Accusation against respondent, alleging causes to revoke all credentials, certificates, 

and authorizations issued to respondent based on: (1) unprofessional conduct; (2) 

evident unfitness for service; (3) immoral conduct; and (4) acts of moral turpitude. 

In aggravation, complainant alleged that a greater degree of adverse action is 

needed to protect the public, schoolchildren, or the profession 

misconduct: (1) evidences multiple acts of wrongdoing, demonstrating a pattern of 

misconduct; (2) was surrounded or followed by bad faith, dishonesty or other violation 

of the law governing educators; (3) significantly harmed a child trusted to his care, the 

public, or educational system; and (4) demonstrated an indifference toward the 

consequences of his misconduct, and had prior notice, warnings or reprimands for 

similar conduct. 

4. 

Complainant offered several disciplinary documents issued to respondent 

by the District. The documents were admitted as direct evidence. 

3 

 
SEPTEMBER 18, 2015 FORMAL LETTER OF REPRIMAND 

5. 

On August 24, 2015, student AB, w

class at Rio Cazadero High School (RCHS), reported to the Elk Grove Unified School 

District (District) that on August 21, 2015, she stayed after class to erase the board 

after respondent asked her to do so. After erasing the board, respondent 

. While hugging AB, respondent told her 

apped her buttocks with his hand. Uncomfortable, AB left the 

classroom. AB then requested that the District remove her permanently from 

r

AB also reported to the District that respondent touched the 

buttocks of female student RB. 

6. 

The District interviewed respondent on September 3, 2015, regarding 

class

way. 

,  

He told AB to 

student from 2012 to 2014, that RB confided in him about personal matters, and that 

in an attempt to make her feel better. Respondent admitted that this was a 

to students. 

7. 

could not confirm that respondent touched 

the buttocks of AB and RB, but determined that respondent used poor judgment while 

interacting with female students, especially when he was alone and one-on-one with 

them. The Di

reasonably 

could have been perceived by AB as inappropriate touching. 

4 

8.

On September 18, 2015, the District issued a formal letter of reprimand 

to respondent for his conduct with AB and RB. The letter set forth the following 

directives: 

1. Do not engage in conduct that may result in 

inappropriate or unwanted physical contact with students, 

employees, or other individuals. 

2. Refrain from commenting on female student

appearance[s]. 

3. Review and comply with the [policies and regulations] 

prohibiting sexual harassment. 

4. Exercise good judgment and act professionally in your 

interactions with students, especially if alone with a female 

student one-on-one. 

5. Consider the consequences of your behavior before you 

act. 

6. Ask for guidance if you have any questions regarding 

what constitutes appropriate conduct with students or the 

7. Do not retaliate against any individual for reporting or 

conduct. 

5 

 
8. Obey all District and school policies, procedures, and 

protocols. 

9. Perform your job duties as required by your job 

description and District policies, procedures, and protocols. 

10. Follow any and all directives issued to you by any 

District administrator. 

FEBRUARY 4, 2016 FORMAL LETTER OF STUDENT CONCERN 

9. 

On February 2, 2016, student LW1 reported to R

, Doug 

Wendle, that on one or more occasions, respondent placed his hand on her body and 

touched her side and lower back when he talked to her in class. Respondent did this 

when she entered the classroom. LW1 emphasized that he placed his hand on her 

conduct made LW1 feel uncomfortable

when she spoke with respondent. 

10.  On February 4, 2016, Mr. Wendle issued a formal letter of student 

concern to respondent for his behavior towards LW1. When interviewed, respondent 

could not recall any interactions with LW1. Respondent was directed to follow the 

same directives in the September 18, 2015 formal letter of reprimand. 

JUNE 30, 2019 RESIGNATION IN LIEU OF TERMINATION 

11.  On March 19, 2019, respondent entered into a Settlement Agreement 

with the District, agreeing to resign from his employment with the District in lieu of 

termination effective June 30, 2019. The underlying circumstances 

6 

proposed termination

investigation in November 2018. 

12.  On September 26, 2018, student LW2 reported to the District that on 

, and that 

respondent stared at her body in a prolonged manner, walked over to her, and asked 

dent stared at her and made 

the comment. About the same time, respondent approached LW2 and held the palm 

of his hand up in the air, signaling that he wanted to high-five LW2. LW2 raised her 

hand to reciprocate, and respondent wrapped both hands around LW2

it for a prolonged period of time, making LW2 uncomfortable. LW2 also reported that 

on more than one occasion, respondent flirted with her. He placed his mouth close to 

her ear and whispered 

On more than one occasion 

respondent 

LW2 felt uncomfortable and weird around respondent. 

13. 

RCHS Principal Doug Wendle interviewed respondent on September 27, 

2018. Respondent admitted giving LW2 a high-five

 He apologized for making anyone uncomfortable in his class. The 

District placed him on paid administrative leave on October 4, 2018. Upon being 

14. 

The Distri

, Keri Van de Star, interviewed 

respondent on November 8, 2018, 

Respondent 

stated: (1) 

, and that he previously 

LW2 

7 

 
 
 
wore

, and he 

; (3) 

; (4) 

with female students, and he cannot help if they think he is flirting with them; (5) LW2 

raised her hand a lot, and he gave her extra help; (6) w

; 

(7) he was a rap artist, and his students follow his music and look him up online. 

Rap Music 

15. 

During his November 8, 2018 interview with Ms. Van de Star, respondent 

asserted that 

did not contain 

Ms. Van de Star and her team conducted a Google 

com stated that he has 

16.  Ms. Van de Star and her team found rap music albums and tracks 

credited to respondent which were readily available online and through streaming 

services. They found lyrics that were explicit, and included topics such as sexual 

intercourse, description of genitalia, drugs, alcohol, prostitution, stripping, profanity, 

violence, weapons, and murder. 

 included: Gang Wars; Sactown 

Bloods and Crips; Damn That DE!; Fahrenheit Collectibles, Brotha Lynch Hun and First 

D.E.; and Southbound. It was not clear when the tracks were produced and released, 

17.  Ms. Van de Star found that respondent was featured on an album 

released on July 13, 2018, titled 

-40 and First Degree The D.E. 

 Be 

The 

album cover featured the buttocks of a woman wearing a black thong while $100 bills 

8 

 
 
are floating in the air near the woman

Rap lyrics from 

I said, you done fucked around and gotten all grown up. 

you get that big ass? Look at your tits, look at your hips, 

look at the way you dancin

and my balls . . . with all of that flirting and teasing and 

switching, licking and dipping like you want some of this 

out, freaky horny and sneaky, 

that ecstasy and weed get your kitty sweaty and drippy and 

sticky make you wanna give me a hickey up on my pricky, 

in the river, the worl

. . . 

s plenty fish 

LETTER OF EXPLANATION REGARDING ALLEGATIONS BY STUDENTS AB AND 

LW2 

18. 

Respondent 

In one undated, unsigned letter, respondent stated that he received his credential and 

2012 and 

He 

freely students being  instructed to call teachers by their first name

dress 

9 

 
 
I had to remove her out of class and she retaliated by complaining about the hug

even though she said that respondent was her favorite teacher. Regarding student 

LW2, respondent explained that 

He 

further explained: 

She called on me frequently for help and I felt compelled to 

respond. One day, I had to remove her from class for 

misbehavior. While venting to her friend, a teacher 

overheard and made the report of me giving her too much 

problem and that nothing should happen to me. She was 

only in my class for a month and a half or so. When she 

returned to my class, everything was fine. 

Respondent characterized the incidents with students AB and LW2 

insignificant  

LETTER OF EXPLANATION REGARDING RAP MUSIC 

19. 

In a another 

respondent explained that the involved students only knew him for a month, and that 

Respondent further explained that he 

mid-1990s, and that he is 

now that he is 44 years old. He further stated: 

It was hurtful to see that the District quoted so many lyrics, 

from so long ago, that were not my own, in the charges. In 

fact, the majority of the lyrics in the charges against me are 

not mine at all. 

10 

controversial music that [the District] has dug up on its own. 

There were a few students that were aware of my music, but 

only the positive, comical, clean music of the last 15 years. I 

am committed to be a 100% teacher and remove the 

controversial material from Spotify, iTunes, and other 

streaming services. 

It was his life-long dream to 

Respondent asserted that he would be taking down the song from streaming services 

and apologized to the District. He assured the District that his students did not know 

about the song, and that the District quoted lyrics that were not his. 

LETTER OF EXPLANATION DATED MARCH 20, 2020 

20. 

In his letter of explanation to the District dated March 20, 2020, 

respondent asserted that 

Teacher of the Year award three times, twice with Elk Grove, and once with National 

 as a credentialed teacher, [he] has won 

comprehensive high schools, and had many other issues . . .  He observed the 

had been removed from 

American teacher. 

model and aimed to bring relief to the 

African 

11 

 
Respondent described AB and RB as 

whiteboard as a r

job today.

one day

hom

R

he allowed AB to clean the 

hugged, and I told her  good 

He removed LW2 one day after being disrespectful in class. 

[his] attention to 

When 

interviewed later by school officials, LW2 complained that respondent gave her too 

much attention. Respondent asser

further stated: 

not wearing adequate clothing. The heater in my class was 

very old and I asked her if she was cold because I thought 

she might need 

that the student misunderstood my comment. 

Respondent clarified that he called African 

teachers a few classrooms over.  

12 

 
 
 
ch more careful of student perceptions and the position I am put 

Respondent regretted 

He ensured 

Respondent also clarified that co-worker BV is a friend who texted him after he 

was placed on administrative leave. 

pending 

Regarding his involvement in rap music in his early years, respondent repeated 

most of the statements made in his second letter of explanation and added that he 

with these other artists and the type of music they prod

Furthermore, he asserted 

[the District] 

He added that during the majority 

but a few 

students learned of his music in his last couple of years at RCHS. He asserted that 

by [the District] from public distribution on 

Respondent explained that his involvement wi

-

song that was remade. Respondent asserted again that he had no control over the title 

or content. He was confident that students did not know about his involvement in the 

13 

 
 
 
song. The District quoted lyrics that were not his, but rather E-

He believed 

been removed from Spotify and iTunes. 

s words.  He also assured that the song has 

Respondent denied that he promoted his music with his students

-

serving, I would 

TESTIMONY OF DOUG WENDLE, RCHS PRINCIPAL 

21.  Mr. Wendle has been employed by the District for 26 years, and has been 

principal for the past 16 years. He hired respondent to teach math at R

Mr. Wendle testified consistent with his February 4, 2016 letter of student 

concern and interview of respondent on September 27, 2018, described above. He 

added that respondent denied touching a student on the buttocks, and that he 

discussed with respondent 

contained in the 

September 18, 2015 letter of reprimand. Respondent agreed to comply with the 

directives. Mr. Wendle also asked respondent about the incident with LW2. 

Respondent denied: looking at LW2; making her feel uncomfortable about how she 

was dressed; asking her if she was feeling cold; or asking her what she was doing on 

the weekend. 

22.  Mr. Wendle 

has a 

Mr. Wendle 

 not been successful in math at other 

schools, that that respondent created new ways to help students become successful in 

math. Mr. Wendle added that respondent was twice selected by top graduating 

14 

 
students for the Honored Educator Award. Mr. Wendle also learned that National 

University recognized respondent as Teacher of the Year. 

23.  Mr. Wendle read in the paper that respondent was knowledgeable about 

the music scene in Sacramento. The news article did not state anything negative about 

respondent. Mr. Wendle 

. 

TESTIMONY OF KERI VAN DE STAR, DISTRICT HUMAN RESOURCES DIRECTOR 

24.  Ms. Van de Star is currently the Human Resources Director for the San 

Ramon Valley Unified School District. At the time of her investigation into 

respondent's conduct, she was the District's Human Resources Director. Ms. Van de 

Star testified consistent with her November 8, 2018 interview with respondent. Her 

found albums, and 

rap music tracks attributed to respondent. 

em to be disturbing and very inappropriate for children. She 

asserted that students were aware of the lyrics because the song was easy to find 

online. As an educator for 12 years and administrator for the past 15 years, she 

understands the role of an educator, and how the educator can affect the lives of 

children. She explained that respondent worked at RCHS, which is a continuation high 

-risk, and 

reflect exemplary 

conduct expected of a teacher. 

15 

RESPONDENT S TESTIMONY 

25. 

Respondent is from Sacramento, California, and began working at Visions 

Unlimited, a mental health center, at age 19. He also tutored in the G Parkway area of 

south Sacramento. He began substitute teaching for the District, then taught math at 

RCHS for six years. After leaving RCHS, respondent began working for the Natomas 

Unified School District at Bannon Creek School where he taught seventh and eighth 

grade math. He also served as the girls basketball coach, and the boys football and 

soccer coach. He served as an advisor for school clubs to 

in engineering and coding. He does not currently teach at Natomas Middle School due 

to this case. 

26. 

Respondent has received awards for his teaching in 2013, 2016, and 

2018. 

 In support of the 

awards, respondent submitted the following: (1) a Certificates of Recognition issued by 

the District in 2015 

 of one 

female and one male student, respectively; and (2) a photo of respondent receiving a 

National University Teacher Excellence Award in 2016. Respondent explained that the 

27. 

testimony mirrored his letters of explanation to the District 

and the Commission. Respondent explained that student AB was removed from 

another school and was placed in his class for approximately two weeks. He denied 

touching AB on the buttocks. He became aware that she complained about his 

. . 

16 

 
 
. she was begging to get back i

AB left his class after she made her 

complaint about respondent. 

28. 

she used terms su

environment by 

and 

Respondent tried to create a positive 

males 

Reference to students as queens and kings as positive reinforcement came from his 

experience as a teacher and community activist. He received no complaints. 

29. 

Respondent admitted that he made a mistake by touching student LW1 

while escorting students outside his class. He knew that the 

e shoulders, not at their 

side. He denied staring at LW1 

LW1 complained about his conduct. He apologized to 

LW1 

30. 

Respondent explained that student LW2 was in his class for three weeks. 

She needed affirmation and craved his attention. One day, she came into class with 

body, but not as she described. At the end of class, she came back into his classroom 

with a yellow bikini-

,  RCHS 

administration did not enforce 

, and respondent felt 

uncomfortable enforcing the dress code because of the 

and 

 Respondent did not want to be misunderstood if he told LW2 

that her outfit was inappropriate. 

17 

 
On another occasion, LW2 called respondent to her desk. He walked over and 

-

raised. Respondent demonstrated the high-five he gave to LW2 by clasping his hands. 

He believed it was appropriate to give high-fives to students as an emphasis of pride 

and whispered in her ear that she did a good job. He became aware that LW2 

complained about him after he had kicked her out of his class for the seventh time. He 

31. 

Addressing his rap music, respondent explained that 

name is short 

He emphasized that the 

Be 

song were not his, a guest artist on his album from 1999 wrote the lyrics, he later 

bought the licensing for the song and put a verse in the song, and he eventually 

removed the song and album, as well as the 

 from official 

distribution. Respondent did not attempt to sell his music to students and did not tell 

students about his rap career. Respondent currently owns a record label called 

Fahrenheit Records. 

32. 

Be 

m cover, respondent explained that 

he was not involved with the cover design. However, he conceded that he approved 

the release of the album cover. 

33. 

Respondent admitted that the albums identified by the District are his 

albums: Gang Wars; Damn that D.E.!; Planet Zero; Fahrenheit Collectibles, Brotha Lynch 

Hung and First D.E.; and Southbound. Not all songs contain his lyrics. For instance, the 

lyrics from the 

 were written by Kevin Mann, 

and that any listener can determine who wrote or sang the song by viewing the credits 

and recognizing their voice. 

18 

 
34.

Respondent asserted that his students at RCHS never brought up his rap 

music in class. Respondent never played his music in the classroom. He did not recall 

having to tell students to stop playing his music in the classroom, but near the end of 

his time at RCHS, teachers told him to stop playing his music, so  someone might have 

LETTERS OF RECOMMENDATION 

35. 

Respondent submitted 12 letters of recommendation, dated from 

December 2018 through September 2021, reflecting his professionalism and 

competency as a teacher, dedication to students, and contributions to his community. 

A sampling of the letters is as follows: 

(a) Brittany Ross, a Lead Instructional Analyst at Bannon Creek School, worked 

with respondent in his seventh and eighth grade classes for four years. She observed 

respondent provide an interactive, positive, and nurturing learning environment, and 

did not 

rap to 

er

(b) Coletha E. Browning, MBA, is a special education teacher that worked with 

respondent at Bannon Creek School beginning in Fall 2019. She has observed 

respondent perform after school activities such coding club facilitator, and basketball, 

football, and soccer coach. Respondent has inspired students through math and sports 

participation. He also inspired and coached Ms. Browning to play basketball in a 

scrimmage with the students, giving her a first-hand experience of what it was like to 

be one of his students. The school needs him as a role model to struggling and 

underprivileged students. 

19 

 
 
(c) Ashley Garcia is a coworker and good friend of respondent. She described 

music

track. 

nowledge of his past 

Ms. Garcia did not observe rap music or its influence 

Most 

(d) Kyle Noland is a seventh and eighth grade English Language Arts teacher at 

greets students at the door, statin

 and students benefit 

by working diligently and 

TESTIMONY OF JONATHAN LEE 

36. 

Jonathan Lee is a Special Education Program Specialist for the District. He 

testified consistently with the contents of his letter of recommendation In 2013, he 

worked at RCHS as an education specialist for five years. He has known respondent 

allegations. Mr. Lee observed respondent have positive interactions with his students 

outside of class in the quad. He did not see or hear anything inappropriate between 

20 

 
 
 
 see respondent sharing explicit rap lyrics of music 

, which he 

with his students. When shown the lyrics attributed to respondent, Mr. Lee agreed that 

the lyrics were inappropriate. 

TESTIMONY OF STEPHANIE ANN SCHULZKUMP 

37. 

Stephanie Schulzkump is the International Baccalaureate Coordinator for 

Bannon Creek School. She testified consistently with the contents of her letter of 

recommendation. She met respondent in the 2018-2019 school year. Ms. Schulzkump 

has observed respondent 

relationship with students as he greeted them at the door, welcomed them to his 

classroom, and interacted with them during math lessons. She saw him constantly 

encouraging his students. His students miss him and are always asking when he will 

come back to school. Ms. Schulzkump is not fully 

She 

students, and never saw respondent exhibit inappropriate behavior in this regard. She 

was not aware until recently that respondent had a rap career. 

online. She would not want explicit rap 

music being played in the classroom. 

TESTIMONY OF LEONARD BAETA 

38. 

Leonard Baeta has been a sixth grade teacher at Bannon Creek School for 

the past five years, and has worked in education for 26 years. He has known 

respondent for approximately four years, since respondent began working on campus. 

He observed respondent teaching in the classroom. He believes respondent is a good 

21 

teacher, in that respondent has the ability to instruct in accordance with California 

standards, uses good communication, inspires students to do better, and exhibits 

39.  Mr. Baeta has worked with respondent as a coach, and has seen 

respondent interact with students outside of the classroom. As in the classroom, 

respondent communicates with and inspires students on the basketball court. He has a 

positive demeanor and rapport with students

allegations, and never saw or heard respondent being inappropriate with female 

students. On the contrary, he encourages students. 

40.  Mr. Baeta is aware that respondent has a side career as a rap musician, 

but has 

TESTIMONY OF COLETHA BROWNING 

41.  Ms. Browning testified consistently with the contents of her letter of 

recommendation. She added that she observed respondent teach before he left 

Bannon Creek School, and the students were quiet, engaged, and attentive. She 

As Athletic Director, Ms. Browning described 

Respondent 

faith in themselves as an 

losing streak, began winning because respondent was their coach. 

42.  Ms. Browning worked with respondent, who took on the coding club 

facilitator role. 

described respondent as a teacher that knows how to relate to children. 

22 

 
 
 
43.

inappropriate conduct with female students. She did not observe inappropriate 

behavior by respond

appropriate

44.  Ms. Browning knew that respondent maintained a career as a rapper, as 

he shared this with her towards the end of the 2021 school year. She was shocked 

because respondent did not strike her as the type of person that would be a rapper. 

She did not hear any explicit rap lyrics from him and did not see or hear him use rap in 

the classroom. She did not hear any derogatory statements towards students in the 

classroom. 

Analysis 

45. 

As a teacher, respondent is held to a high standard of conduct and is a 

role model for children. A teacher is regarded as a role model for students, as noted by 

several courts: 

The calling (of a teacher) is so intimate, its duties so 

delicate, the things in which a teacher might prove 

unworthy or would fail are so numerous that they are 

incapable of enumeration in any legislative enactment . . . 

His habits, his speech, his good name, his cleanliness, the 

wisdom and propriety of his unofficial utterances, his 

associations, all are involved. His ability to inspire children 

and to govern them, his power as a teacher, and the 

character for which he stands are matters of major concern 

23 

 
179 Cal.App.2d 808, 4 Cal.Rptr. 286, citing from 

, 66 Cal.App. 157, 168, 225 P. 783.) 

(1960) 

There are certain professions which impose upon persons 

attracted to them responsibilities and limitations on 

freedom of action which do not exist in regard to other 

callings. Public officials such as judges, policemen and 

schoolteachers fall into such a category. 

As between 

of the education . . . is the instilling of a proper respect for 

authority and obedience to necessary discipline. Lessons are 

., 19 Cal.App.2d 405, 408, 65 P.2d 912.) And 

as our Supreme Court said in 

, 

the public school system is regarded by the public and 

pupils in the light of an exemplar, whose words and actions 

are likely to be followed by the (students) coming under 

(his) care and protection  

(

(1971) 16 Cal.App.3d 820, 824-825; see also 

(2011) 194 

Cal.App.4th 1454, 1463-1464.)

24 

46.

Respondent repeatedly violated the high standard of conduct required of 

him as a teacher. He was repeatedly reprimanded, warned, and ultimately resigned 

pending discipline for his behavior towards female students. 

47. 

The evidence

, established that 

he: (1) 

arm on her lower waist, and tapped her on the lower back; (2) told RB that she was a 

; (3) gave student LW2 a high-five and made her feel 

uncomfortable as he did so; (4) 

outfit to class and asked LW2 if she was cold; (6) was on a first name basis with LW2; 

5) recalled that LW2 wore a yellow 

(7

flirted with them; (8

9) is a rap artist and 

that some of his students follow his music and look him up online; (10) approved the 

1) 

My Stripper ; and (12) is the owner/producer of the albums Gang Wars, Damn that 

D.E.!, Planet Zero, Fahrenheit Collectibles, Brotha Lynch Hung and First D.E., and 

Southbound. Although the District found that many different rap albums and songs 

were attributed to respondent, the evidence was not clear when they were produced 

and released. Respondent credibly testified that most of his albums and songs were 

made in the 1990s. It was not established that the majority of res

songs and 

, and are thus given little 

weight. However, 

album and song. His claims to have no control over the title, content, and album cover 

were unpersuasive. He was credited with the album and song, and approved the 

album cover

song 

to minimize his involvement with the album and 

. 

25 

48.

witnesses spoke highly of his passion, dedication, and 

talent for teaching math. Most if not all of the witnesses were familiar with the 

, and their positive opinions of his teaching have not changed. 

Only one witness, Mr. Lee, provided observations of 

the time of the allegations made by the female students 

observations and opinion 

 with female students were positive, 

d that the lyrics 

attributed to respondent were 

None of the witnesses saw or heard respondent act inappropriately with female 

students. However, the interactions took place while respondent was alone with these 

female students. Moreover, none of the witnesses expressed knowledge of the 

2015 formal letter of reprimand requiring respondent to follow its directives 

related to 

. 

s did 

not and could not testify regarding his conduct with female students while respondent 

was alone with them, which is an essential issue in this matter. For this reason, their 

testimony is given little weight 

or likely future 

conduct when alone with female students. 

49.  Many of the 

provided insight 

conduct at Bannon Creek School (Bannon). He is dedicated to his 

students and he took on additional roles as a coach and coding club facilitator. Their 

unwavering support for respondent has not changed. None of the authors expressed 

any knowledge of the allegations involving 

inappropriate conduct with 

female students at RCHS, the circumstances, or the frequency of the incidents. For 

these reasons, the letters are given minimal weight. 

26 

 
50.

Respondent testified in a forthright manner, but he has not taken any 

meaningful responsibility for his actions. When interacting with the females involved, 

could not help it if female students flirted 

with him. However, as the sole adult in the classroom, respondent knew to exercise 

extreme diligence and caution when interacting with female students, particularly after 

receiving the 

formal letter of reprimand. Instead of following the directives 

contained therein, he repeatedly disregarded them. In addition, he placed fault on his 

female students, rather than acknowledging his own behavior. He characterized 

student AB as 

disruptive

,  and 

et seeking my 

and 

. Such blame shifting demonstrates a lack of 

rehabilitation. (

 (1989) 49 Cal.3d 933, 940 [

towards 

].) 

51. 

Respondent further attempted to shift blame to others when he claimed 

that the lyrics in the song  Be 

was written by another artist. However, the 

song was on his album

and he 

52. 

Respondent is to be commended for his teaching awards such as 

certificates of recognition 

Excellence Award. His skills as a math teacher were highly regarded at RCHS and 

Bannon. At Bannon, he took on additional roles as the basketball, football, and soccer 

coach, and coding club facilitator. 

it is concerning that respondent repeatedly disregarded the 

, 

 over 

27 

 
three years and repeated the same offenses involving female students. The fact that 

respondent attempted to shift or attribute blame to the female students demonstrates 

that he does not acknowledge and appreciate the seriousness of his conduct. 

sexual intercourse, descriptions of genitalia, stripping, and profanity. The songs on the 

album were available online and through music streaming services for easy access to 

 topics such as 

students. 

MORRISON FACTORS 

53. 

In 

(

)

 (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 235 

the teaching profession only upon a showing that his retention in the profession poses 

a significant danger of harm to either students, school employees, or others who 

might be aff

the conduct indicated that a teacher is unfit 

to teach. (

. at p. 229.) (Bold added.) The court set forth the following guidelines, 

which have since been enumerated in California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 

80302, subdivision (a): 

The Committee, in conducting its investigation, shall 

determine the relationship between the alleged misconduct 

ability to effectively perform the duties authorized by the 

credential. Such relationship may be based on facts which 

include, but are not limited to, the following: 

28 

(1) The likelihood that the conduct may have adversely 

affected students, fellow teachers, or the educational 

community, and the degree of such adversity anticipated; 

(2) The proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct; 

(3) The type of credential held or applied for by the person 

involved; 

(4) The extenuating or aggravating circumstances 

surrounding the conduct; 

(5) The praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives 

resulting in the conduct; 

(6) The likelihood of the recurrence of the questioned 

conduct; 

(7) The extent to which disciplinary action may inflict an 

adverse impact or chilling effect upon the constitutional 

rights of the person involved, or other certified persons; 

(8) The publicity or notoriety given to the conduct. 

In evaluating the 

 factors, only the pertinent factors need to be 

analyzed. (

462, 476.) 

(2010) 108 Cal.App.4th 

it 

may apply the 

 factors in the aggregate, and consider the totality of a 

29 

(1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1457 [Commission does not have 

].) 

ADVERSE EFFECT ON OTHERS: 

54. 

effect on the female students involved. Student AB was sufficiently affected by 

d to be permanently removed from his class. 

Student LW1 understandably felt uncomfortable when he looked her  up and down.

Student LW2 felt uncomfortable and weird around respondent because of his conduct 

toward her, including asking her if she was cold and whispering in her ear that she is 

dministrators at 

RCHS and the District spent substantial time and resources over the course of three 

years 

55. 

s second career as a rap artist was established, as was his 

June 2018 

During his November 

8, 2018 interview with the District, respondent admitted that some of his students 

follow his music and look him up online. As an exemplar, his words and actions  are 

likely to be followed by the (students) coming under (his) 

 (

, 

, 41 Cal.2d 546, 552.) 

56. 

The fact that he uses a pseudonym for his online activities as a rap artist 

does not excuse his actions. For example, the court upheld 

posting a sexually explicit personal online advertisement despite the advertisement 

being placed anonymously on an age-restricted site 

profession or employer. (

, 194 Cal.App.4th 1454 at p. 1458.) Courts have also 

30 

 
 
upheld the dismissal of credential holders for online activities that were not sexual in 

on students. For example, 

ssal for making social 

media comments about students who took part in a protest supporting immigration. 

(

(2020), 53 Cal.App.5th 327.) 

PROXIMITY OR REMOTENESS IN TIME: 

57. 

Respondent resigned from his employment with the District in 2019, for 

misconduct which occurred in 2015, 2016, and 2018. The District reported his change 

in employment status thereafter. These incidents are not remote in time. Complainant 

did not delay filing the Accusation against respondent. 

TYPE OF CREDENTIAL HELD: 

58.  On January 12, 2016, the Commission issued a Preliminary Single Subject 

Teaching Credential to respondent. The evidence established that respondent 

engaged in unprofessional conduct towards his female students almost immediately 

after being issued his credential. His misconduct would have affected his ability to 

teach at RCHS. 

EXTENUATING OR AGGRAVATING CIRCUMSTANCES 

59. 

California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80300, subdivision (b), 

states: 

stance which 

demonstrates that a greater degree of adverse action for an 

act of professional misconduct is needed to adequately 

31 

protect the public, schoolchildren or the profession. 

Aggravating factors may include, but are not limited to, the 

following: 

(2) that the misconduct evidences multiple acts of 

wrongdoing or demonstrate a pattern of misconduct; 

(4) that the misconduct significantly harmed a child 

entrusted to the care of a credential holder or applicant, 

significantly harmed the public or the educational system; 

(5) that the holder or applicant demonstrated indifference 

toward the consequence of the misconduct, which includes 

failure to comply with known court orders. 

60. 

The evidence established that respondent engaged in multiple acts of 

wrongdoing towards multiple female students, who were negatively affected by his 

conduct and reported him. Despite receiving a formal letter of reprimand from the 

District regarding students AB and RB, he continued to engage in the same or similar 

behavior towards female students LW1 and LW2, leading to his resignation from 

employment pending discipline. 

61. 

Respondent demonstrated indifference towards the consequences of his 

conduct. When informed of being placed on paid administrative leave, respondent 

32 

 
 
 
letter of reprimand, respondent stated that he could not help it if female students 

flirted with him. 

accept any responsibility, there is a likelihood that respondent would repeat the same 

or similar misconduct. For these reasons, a high degree of discipline is necessary to 

protect the public, schoolchildren, and the profession. 

62. 

In mitigation, respondent

the authors of the letters of 

recommendation spoke and wrote of respondent as a competent and dedicated 

teacher. They had no issues or concerns with respon

students or his rap career, other than agreeing that his lyrics were inappropriate. 

H

and coach, the evidence did not establish that responden  misconduct was justified. 

PRAISEWORTHINESS OR BLAMEWORTHINESS OF MOTIVES: 

63. 

There is nothing praiseworthy about r

students AB, RB, LW1, and LW2. 

(

108 

Cal.App.4th 462, 477.) In addition, although respondent asserted that his rap music 

was never mentioned or played in his classroom, there is no praiseworthiness in his 

motives. 

LIKELIHOOD OF RECURRENCE: 

64. 

accept or recognize any responsibility, there is a substantial likelihood that respondent 

will again engage in the same or similar conduct. This likelihood is made more 

33 

 
concerning by the fact that respondent attributes his conduct with female students to 

EXTENT TO WHICH DISCIPLINARY ACTION MAY INFLICT ADVERSE IMPACT OR 

CHILLING EFFECT: 

65. 

Discipline of respondent for the content and publication of his rap lyrics 

could have a chilling effect on his constitutional rights of free expression. However, the 

this instance and under these circumstances. 

PUBLICITY OR NOTORIETY GIVEN TO THE CONDUCT: 

66. 

have 

sexually explicit and derogatory songs 

and lyrics. However, there was no evidence presented to establish that there was 

notoriety among students regarding respon

. 

Conclusion 

67.  When all the 

 factors are weighed and balanced, the conduct in 

which respondent engaged shows that respondent is unfit to teach. His retention in 

the teaching profession would pose a significant danger of harm to students, the 

educational community, and the public. Specifically, the evidence established that 

respondent engaged in repeated acts of misconduct towards female students and 

publicly associated himself with lyrics in his rap album 

.  He 

not have adequate assurances that respondent will not commit the same misconduct 

again. As set forth in the Factual Findings and Legal Conclusions as a whole, the 

. The Commission does 

34 

 
evidence established that respondent demonstrated unprofessional conduct, evidence 

unfitness for service, immoral conduct, and committed acts of moral turpitude. Given 

the serio

 and the potential for harm, application 

of the 

 factors, and aggravating factors, the appropriate adverse action is 

revocation. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Complainant bears the burden of proof in this matter. The standard of 

proof is clear and convincing evidence. (See 

 (1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035, 1039; 

 (1982) 135 Cal.App.3d 583.) 

evidence of such convincing force that it demonstrates, in contrast to the opposing 

evidence, a high probability of the truth of the facts for which it is offered. It is a 

higher standard of proof than proof by a preponderance of the evidence. (See, BAJI 

No. 2.62.) 

(1998) 18 Cal.4th 1079, 1090.) 

2. 

Pursuant to Education Code section 44421, the Commission shall: 

[P]ublicly reprove, revoke or suspend for immoral or 

unprofessional conduct, or for persistent defiance of, and 

refusal to obey, the laws regulating the duties of persons 

serving the public school system, or for any cause that 

would have warranted the denial of an application for a 

35 

 
credential or the renewal thereof, or for evident unfitness 

for service. 

Pursuant to Education Code section 44345, subdivision (e), the Commission may 

d

3. 

An 

private admonition, or public reproval of a credential holder, or the suspension or 

Ed. Code, § 44000.5.) 

4. 

California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80300, subdivision (b), 

provides that aggravating factors necessitate a greater degree of adverse action to 

adequately protect the public, schoolchildren, or the profession. Aggravating factors 

include: multiple acts of wrongdoing or pattern of misconduct; significant harm to a 

child entrusted to the teacher, or to the public or educational system; and indifference 

toward the consequences of the misconduct. 

Causes for Adverse Action 

UNPROFESSIONAL CONDUCT 

5. 

Based on the Factual Findings as a whole, 

his female students and his feature as a rapper on his 

 album and 

song in June 2018 constitutes unprofessional conduct. Cause exists for adverse action 

6. 

. 

clearly not fit, not 

adapted to or unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of temperamental defects 

or inadequacies.  (

36 

 
conduct,  

er trait, presumably 

) The evidence established that 

respondent

, and his failure to 

acknowledge his conduct, demonstrates that he is unsuitable for teaching due to a 

fixed character trait, not remediable merely on notice that his conduct failed to meet 

Consequently, based on the Factual Findings as a whole, 

cause exists 

for evident unfitness 

for service pursuant to Education Code section 44421. 

IMMORAL CONDUCT 

7. 

Pursuant to Education Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(1), a school 

district may discipline a permanent certificated employee for 

 conduct. In 

(2011) 194 

Cal.App.4th 1454, 1466, the court explained that: 

A teacher may . . . be dismissed for 

§ 44932, subd. (a)(1).

hostile to the welfare of the general public and contrary to 

good morals. Immorality has not been confined to sexual 

matters, but includes . . . an inconsiderate attitude toward 

good order and the public welf

(Board of Education v. 

Weiland (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811, 4 Cal.Rptr. 286.) 

Moreover, the definition of immoral or unprofessional 

conduct must be considered in conjunction with the unique 

37 

position of public school teachers, upon whom are imposed 

(Board of Trustees 

v. Stubblefield, supra, 16 Cal.App.3d at p. 824, 94 

Cal.Rptr.318.) 

8. 

Based on the Factual Findings as a whole, respondent showed a moral 

indifference and an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public welfare. 

His conduct was inconsistent with the reasonable expectations society places upon 

teachers to model appropriate adult conduct to the students they teach, and to 

protect the safety of students and advance their educational welfare. Consequently, 

based on the Factual Findings as a whole, cause exists for adverse action against 

44421. 

ACTS OF MORAL TURPITUDE 

9. 

(1979) 89 Cal.App.3d 30, 36.) Based on the Factual Findings as a whole, respondent

conduct was contrary to justice, honesty, modesty or good morals. Cause exists for 

ns 

44421 and 44345, subdivision (e). 

Conclusion 

10. 

Application of the 

factors to the facts in this matter, on balance, 

indicate that respondent is unfit to teach. Adverse action against respondent is 

warranted, and such action must be balanced in light of the mitigating and 

38 

extenuating circumstances involved. The purpose of a disciplinary action such as this 

one is not to punish the licensee, but rather to protect the public. (

(1979) 95 Cal.App.3d 161; 

(1971) 16 Cal.App.3d 450, 457.) Revocation of 

to protect students of California schools.

ORDER

The Preliminary Single Subject Teaching Credential and any other credentials, 

certificates, and authorizations issued to respondent Michael Neely Colen are hereby 

REVOKED.

DATE: January 25, 2022

DANETTE C. BROWN

Administrative Law Judge

Office of Administrative Hearings

39

