BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Accusation Against: 

BRANDON ANTHONY JONES, 

Clear Single Subject Teaching Credential, Preliminary 

Administrative Services Credential, Administrative Services 

Credential, Certificate of Eligibility, 

Respondent. 

Case No. 2-24026402 

OAH No. 2021060014 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Regina Brown, Presiding Administrative Law Judge, State of California, Office of 

Administrative Hearings, heard this matter remotely on November 2, 2021, and 

January 4, 2022. 

Aspasia A. Papavassiliou, Deputy Attorney General, represented complainant 

Mary Vixie Sandy, Ed.D., Executive Director, California Commission on Teacher 

Credentialing. 

Respondent Brandon Anthony Jones represented himself at hearing. 

The matter was submitted for decision on January 4, 2022.

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1. 

Respondent Brandon Anthony Jones holds or held three certification 

documents issued by the California Commission on Teacher Credentialing 

(Commission). A Clear Single Subject Teaching Credential with an authorization in 

Science/Social Science was issued on June 3, 2013, and reissued on July 1, 2018. An 

Administrative Services Credential, Certificate of Eligibility, was issued on June 1, 2013. 

A Preliminary Administrative Services Credential was issued on July 26, 2018. All of 

these credentials were in full force and effect at all times relevant to this proceeding. 

2. 

Respondent previously held a Preliminary Single Subject Teaching 

Credential issued on March 8, 2006, which expired on April 1, 2014. Respondent also 

previously held an Emergency Crosscultural Language and Academic Development 

Permit issued on February 20, 2007, which expired and was reissued twice, and finally 

expired on April 1, 2013. 

3.

At its August 13-14, 2020 meeting, the Commission’s Committee of 

Credentials found probable cause to recommend the suspension of respondent’s 

Preliminary Administrative Services Credential for a period of 90 days. The Committee 

of Credentials found that respondent, an administrator, was subject to discipline 

because he resigned with allegations pending against him, in particular, that he failed 

to report students’ complaints that a teacher grabbed them and he obtained students’ 

incident statements but did not notify his immediate supervisor, the Department of 

Children Services, parents or the police. Also, it was alleged that he falsified documents 

2

in an attempt to demonstrate that he had followed up on the students’ complaints 

when he had not. Respondent requested an administrative hearing.

4. 

Complainant Mary Vixie Sandy, Ed.D., filed the accusation in her official 

capacity as the Executive Director of the Commission on April 2, 2021. The accusation 

charged that respondent’s alleged misconduct constituted unprofessional conduct, 

immoral conduct, and moral turpitude.

5. 

6. 

Respondent filed a notice of defense. This hearing followed. 

At hearing, complainant amended the accusation at page A6, paragraph 

17, lines 19-21 and changed the initials “CH”1 to “WH,” and deleted the phrase, “in an 

incident prior to the scratching incident.”

Unprofessional Conduct 

7. 

In July 2018, respondent was hired as the Dean of Students at Monroe 

Middle School in the Campbell Union School District (District). This was his first 

position as an administrator. Respondent is a mandated reporter. Pursuant to Penal 

Code sections 11166, subdivision (a), and 11167, subdivision (a)(1), a mandated 

reporter must report to an agency (immediately or as soon as is practicably possible) 

whenever the mandated reporter, in the mandated reporter’s professional capacity or 

within the scope of the mandated reporter’s employment, has knowledge of or 

observes a child whom the mandated reporter knows or reasonably suspects has been 

the victim of child abuse or neglect.

1 The students are identified by their initials to maintain their privacy.

3

 
8.

Jennifer Snavely was an eighth grade Core and English Language 

Development (ELD) teacher during the 2018-2019 school year. Snavely was in a 

beginning teacher induction program. It was known that she suffered from a medical 

condition (

), and she was periodically out on medical leave. 

9. 

According to respondent, Monroe Middle School had merged with 

another school and the student population had increased from approximately 700 

students to 1100 students. Snavely was transferred from a special assignment to the 

classroom setting as a result of the merger. Starting in September 2018, respondent 

noticed an escalation of classroom management issues in Snavely’s classroom. 

Respondent spoke to Snavely about the classroom management issues and informed 

the principal and vice-principal of his concerns. The principal Gilbert Rodriguez and 

vice-principal Veronica Flores told him that they would “handle the teacher.”

10. 

In an email dated November 9, 2018, Snavely reported to respondent 

that on a daily basis, she was having problems controlling her class and she needed 

assistance. Respondent spoke to the students about classroom expectations. Again, 

respondent reported the classroom management issues to Rodriguez and the 

vice-principal. As a result, they also began to conduct classroom observations of 

Snavely. Respondent would check in with the principal and vice-principal about the 

classroom management issues, especially after they conducted classroom observations 

of Snavely. The principal told respondent that the superintendent had placed Snavely 

at the site and was aware that Snavely was an issue and they were working on how to 

handle her. In December, when respondent again reported classroom management 

issues, Rodriguez told respondent that they did not have any substitutes to take 

Snavely’s place. Respondent felt that he was receiving no support or mentoring from 

the principal. 

4

11.

On December 3, 2018, Snavely wrote an email to respondent indicating 

that she was suspending student JC because he was an ongoing problem and she was 

meeting with his father the next morning. Respondent met with JC and discussed the 

recent incident which involved “silly string,” and the expectation that JC needed to 

change his behavior. 

12.  On January 16, 2019, Snavely emailed respondent that she was 

suspending two students, CH and EA, because they were constantly “destroying” her 

class and she was going to call their parents. That same day, respondent had CH and 

EA submit incident statements after hearing “chatter” about their classroom 

experiences. In the incident statements, the students indicated that Snavely would get 

angry and “lose it” and engage in a tug-of-war with students and their backpacks. 

Respondent met with Snavely to discuss the suspension, her contact with the parents, 

and what was going on in the classroom. 

13.  On January 24, 2019, CH submitted an incident statement to respondent 

stating that Snavely had sent him out of the classroom. When he went to retrieve his 

backpack, Snavely would not let CH have it and pulled it away from him. Another 

student retrieved CH’s backpack from Snavely. Respondent did not contact CH’s 

parents or meet with CH and the teacher. 

14. 

In January 2019, respondent compiled the incident statements of CH and 

EA and other documents regarding Snavely’s classroom management issues into an 

orange file folder. Respondent conveyed his concerns to Rodriguez. Rodriguez said 

that he would “take care of it.” According to respondent, Rodriguez questioned the 

students’ credibility because of their reputations as “rabblerousers.” Respondent left 

the orange file folder on Rodriguez’s desk. The file remained on Rodriguez’s desk until 

February, when respondent found the file in his mailbox. Respondent saw that there 

5

was no indication in Powerschool, the computerized database, that Rodriguez had 

taken an action. Respondent took the orange file folder to his office.

15. 

In January 2019, student WH had a cast on his broken arm. WH got out 

of his chair to attempt to plug in a Chromebook. Snavely ripped the charger out of his 

hand hurting his arm with the cast on it. WH testified at hearing that he did not tell 

anyone about the incident until two months later in March. 

16.  On February 14, 2019, Snavely sent an email to respondent stating that 

student BH was dressed inappropriately and asked that someone remove her from the 

classroom. Respondent removed the student from the classroom. In an incident 

statement, which was partly illegible, BH wrote that when students did something that 

Snavely did not like, she would pull on their sweaters, grip their arms tightly, and 

engage in a tug-of-war with their backpacks. The evidence did not establish that 

respondent contacted BH’s parents or met with BH and Snavely. 

17. 

Also on February 14, 2019, student JP submitted an incident statement to 

respondent. JP wrote that she and her friend AG were sitting on “the tall chairs” which 

Snavely said that they were not allowed to sit on. When they asked why, Snavely 

pulled the chairs effectively pushing them off the chairs and said, “I am sick and tired 

of this.” Snavely told them to leave the classroom. While they were exiting the 

classroom, JP’s hand was on the door, and Snavely closed the door on her hand and 

said to JP, “Want it to hurt more?” JP also reported to respondent that on one 

occasion Snavely grabbed both of her arms hard, but did not cause bruising. 

Respondent did not call JP’s parents and never met with JP and Snavely. Respondent 

did not notify the Department of Children Services or the police. 

6

18.

On March 5, 2019, CH submitted an incident statement to respondent 

stating that while he was taking a test, Snavely attempted to retrieve the test before he 

could finish it. He refused to relinquish the test. Snavely grabbed hard and pinched 

him with her nails scratching his arm causing pain. Respondent also took the 

statement of a student who witnessed the incident. Respondent did not call CH’s 

parents or meet with CH and Snavely. Respondent did not notify the Department of 

Children Services or the police. According to respondent, he did not call the parents 

because they spoke Spanish and he does not speak Spanish. 

19.  On March 6, 2019, CH notified the principal of the incident. The principal 

saw visible marks on his arm and took photographs. When respondent was called, he 

brought the orange file folder to the office. Rodriguez acted as if he had never seen 

the orange file folder before. He called the superintendent and the human resources 

department.  

20. 

The district superintendent Shelly Viramontez and assistant 

superintendent Lena Bundtzen arrived at the school to investigate the incident that 

occurred on March 5, 2019. In a meeting with Viramontez, Bundtzen, Rodriguez, and 

Flores, respondent said that he had a “file of past incidents” involving Snavely. He went 

to his office to retrieve the file. 

21. 

Because respondent was gone for over 10 minutes, Viramontez and 

Bundtzen went to respondent’s office. They observed respondent writing on an email 

he had printed out. In total, he had printed four emails sent from Snavely to him dated 

November 9, 2018, December 3, 2018, January 16, 2019, and February 14, 2019, which 

involved the classroom management issues described in Factual Findings 10, 11, 12, 

and 16 above. At the bottom of the emails, respondent had handwritten notes of the 

actions he took in response to the emails. 

7

22.

Respondent was placed on administrative leave for allegedly falsifying 

documents (the emails with his handwritten notes) in an attempt to demonstrate that 

he had followed up on issues regarding Snavely when in fact he had failed to take any 

action. According to respondent, he was making the notes to make sure that he could 

vindicate himself because he felt that the District would “saddle” him with whatever 

had happened. 

23. 

That same day, Bundtzen interviewed several students. She contacted the 

police and the Department of Children Services. The principal contacted their parents. 

Snavely was placed on paid administrative leave. Snavely passed away six months later. 

24. 

After speaking with his union representative, on March 7, 2019, 

respondent resigned from the Campbell Union School District, effective April 16, 2019. 

He rejected Viramontez’s offer to be reassigned to the District office to work until April 

30, 2019. 

25.  On March 12, 2019, Bundtzen notified the Commission of respondent’s 

resignation with the pending allegations. 

26. 

Bundtzen testified at hearing. She has been the assistant superintendent 

for human resources since 2017. Bundtzen stated that respondent, as a mandated 

reporter, had a duty to contact the Department of Children Services if he believed that 

a student had been harmed. Although respondent told Bundtzen that he met with 

students and took their incident statements, he did not document in Powerschool that 

he met with students or called their parents, which was important to establish a 

pattern of behavior by Snavely, especially since there were allegations against Snavely 

from different students. According to Bundtzen, respondent’s excuse that he was 

dealing with a teacher suffering from a 

 did not change his reporting 

8

requirements. Bundtzen considered respondent’s attempts to document the actions 

that he took on the emails, after the investigation was initiated, as insufficient.

27. 

Viramontez testified at hearing. She has been the superintendent since 

2017, and prior to that she was the associate superintendent for nine years.

Viramontez was concerned about the students’ safety and the lack of awareness by the 

principal and vice-principal of Snavely’s misconduct. Viramontez found respondent’s 

organizational system to be questionable as it consisted primarily of stacks of papers 

in a box. 

28. 

Flores testified at hearing. She has been the assistant principal at Monroe 

Middle School since July 2018, before that she was the dean of students for one year, 

and from 2015 to 2017, she was the equity coach. According to Flores, she was not 

aware of any incidents where Snavely was physical with students. 

29. 

Rodriguez was the principal for one year from 2018 to 2019, and before 

that, he was the assistant principal for two years at Monroe Middle School. Currently, 

he is the principal at a charter school. According to Rodriguez, who testified at 

hearing, respondent never informed him about the incidents involving Snavely. 

Rodriguez stated that he was aware that there may have been classroom management 

concerns because Snavely was returning after an extended leave of absence, but he 

denied knowledge of anything else. Rodriguez’s testimony that he was first provided 

the orange file folder on March 6, 2019, was not credible. It is, however, entirely 

plausible that Rodriguez was not aware of the contents of the orange file folder 

because he never looked at the contents when respondent gave it to him in January 

2019. This supports respondent’s testimony that Rodriguez did not want to be 

involved and “kept his head in the sand.” According to respondent, Rodriguez was 

9

demoted from the position of principal before he left the middle school at the end of 

the 2018-2019 school year. 

Respondent’s Additional Evidence 

30. 

Respondent received a bachelor’s degree from Alcorn State University in 

2006. He has taught in public schools since 2006. He received a master’s degree in 

Educational Leadership from Santa Clara University in 2010. He taught social studies 

for seven years with the Eastside Union School District, and from 2014 to 2018, he was 

also the assistant to the associate vice principal. 

31. 

In a letter to the Commission, dated December 2, 2019, respondent 

wrote that his employment with the District “never seem[ed] to be right” from the 

outset with his interactions with the principal and vice-principal. For example, a 

teacher filed a grievance against respondent, an African American male, for allegedly 

racially threatening the teacher. Respondent was found not to be in violation of any 

regulations. That same teacher, in a meeting with the eighth grade faculty, openly 

cursed respondent, the principal and vice-principal, and received a disciplinary action. 

However, the principal mediated with the teacher and directed respondent not to have 

any interactions with the teacher. Thereafter, respondent felt that he was a “target” 

and did not have the support of the principal and vice-principal. In October 2018, 

respondent spoke to the director of student services Rosanno Polamao about his 

concerns. Respondent met with Polamao and Rodriguez and shared that he did not 

feel supported and that he felt uncomfortable; however, according to respondent, 

things did not change. 

32. 

In his letter to the Commission, respondent also wrote that from 

December 2018 to March 2019, he handled Snavely’s classroom management issues 

10 

and student discipline and met with parents, students and Snavely. Respondent 

described one occasion where Snavely grabbed a student, and respondent questioned 

the student and the teacher and met with the student’s parents. When respondent 

asked the principal to sit in on the meeting, Rodriguez declined. Respondent also 

stated that when additional allegations arose against the teacher, he informed 

Rodriguez that he was conducting an investigation.

33. 

Respondent acknowledged that he failed to fulfill his duty as a mandated 

reporter. He stated that he did not report the incidents because he was “the only one 

trying to figure out how to get it done.” Respondent stated that he did not know how 

to handle the situation as an administrator, but when he sought guidance from 

Rodriguez, it was not forthcoming. Respondent stated that he was “not strong 

enough” to report the incidents to the police or Department of Children Services. He 

believes that he is “a scapegoat” for the administration’s failure to deal with Snavely. 

34. 

After his resignation, respondent took time off from teaching after 

serving as an educator for 15 years. He had expected to return as a substitute teacher 

in the Berryessa Unified School District. However, since the onset of the COVID-19 

pandemic, respondent has been homeschooling his 10-year-old son. 

35. 

Respondent testified at hearing in an open, forthright, and credible 

manner, consistent with one who was telling the truth. Respondent’s explanation 

regarding the four emails was convincing. Respondent was not attempting to deceive 

the superintendent, but was trying to document the actions that he had taken in 

dealing with Snavely’s classroom management issues. 

Respondent testified that he had several email exchanges with the principal to 

support his contentions that he had informed the principal of Snavely’s misconduct. 

11 

On November 12, 2021, complainant confirmed that all email communications 

between respondent and Rodriguez were deleted one year after they left employment 

pursuant to District policy. 

36. 

Jennifer Phillips, a teacher at Monroe Middle School, wrote a letter of 

support, dated December 1, 2019. Phillips described respondent as professional, kind, 

genuine, and passionate about his experience teaching high school history. She 

described respondent’s expressed desire to help students become their personal best 

and noted that he had inspirational art on the wall of his office. According to Phillips, 

at the start of the school year, respondent established himself as the administrator 

that dealt with disciplinary issues and as a person who actually liked kids. She 

described respondent as visible, being outside during passing of classes, and relating 

to students and teachers who felt comfortable with him. He was known as “someone 

who could get things done.” Respondent would locate a student who had not shown 

up to class. He would remove a student from class, counsel the student, and return the 

student to class with an improved attitude which, according to Phillips, “alone is worth 

its weight in gold to a teacher.” She was shocked when she heard that respondent 

would not be returning. She concluded her letter with, “This man gave his heart and 

soul to [Monroe Middle School], and was there many nights, past dark, working at his 

computer, perfecting his craft. Throughout the course of a day, he was the most visible 

administrator, always moving a mile a minute, and always with a smile.” 

37.  On November 19, 2019, respondent completed a Mandated Reporter: 

Child Abuse and Neglect training program. 

12 

Ultimate Factual Findings

38.

The evidence established that respondent failed to notify the parents, the 

Department of Children Services and/or the police of the inappropriate conduct by 

Snavely, including grabbing, pulling on, and/or injuring several students. Respondent 

failed to perform his duty as a mandated reporter. 

39. 

The evidence did not establish that respondent falsified documents in an 

attempt to demonstrate that he had followed up on issues involving the teacher. In 

closing argument, complainant conceded that that the evidence did not establish, as 

alleged in the accusation on page 7, lines 3-4, that “[r]espondent had made 

handwritten notes of the actions he purportedly took, but which in fact did not take 

place. . . .” The notes that respondent made related to the classroom management 

issues. 

40. 

The evidence failed to establish that respondent had never shared 

information about the teacher’s conduct with the principal. It appears that the incident 

statement involving CH on January 24, 2019, and incidents before that date were 

included in the orange file folder placed on Rodriguez’s desk, which Rodriguez should 

have reviewed and taken action upon. However, the incident statement involving JP 

and JS on February 14, 2019, and the incidents that occurred thereafter, were likely not 

placed in the orange file folder for Rodriguez’s review. Given that the emails between 

respondent and the principal were destroyed by the District, there is no evidence to 

contradict respondent’s testimony that he informed the principal of incidents that 

occurred after January 2019. Therefore, the evidence failed to establish that 

respondent did not report all of the incidents of misconduct by Snavely to the 

principal. In closing argument, complainant acknowledged that the principal and 

assistant principal were aware of Snavely’s classroom management issues. 

13 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

The Commission is responsible for the credentialing of certificated 

personnel, including issuing credentials and taking adverse action against credential 

holders. (Ed. Code, § 44000 et seq.; Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80001 et seq.) Adverse 

action includes the suspension or revocation of a credential. (Ed. Code, § 44000.5.)

2. 

The burden of proof is on complainant to show cause for discipline by 

clear and convincing evidence. (

(1982) 

135 Cal.App.3d 853; Evid. Code, § 500.) Clear and convincing evidence requires proof 

that is so clear as to leave no substantial doubt and that is sufficiently strong to 

command the unhesitating assent of every reasonable mind. (

(2008) 169 Cal.App.4th 176, 190.)

3. 

Expiration of a credential does not deprive the Commission of its 

authority to impose discipline. (Ed. Code, § 44440, subd. (b).)

4.

Administrative proceedings regarding the discipline of professional 

licenses are intended not to punish the applicant or licensee, but to protect the public. 

(

(1998) 17 Cal.4th 763, 785-786.)

Causes for Discipline 

5. 

Education Code section 44421 authorizes the Commission to privately 

admonish, publicly reprove, suspend, or revoke the credential of a credential holder 

who has engaged in “immoral or unprofessional conduct,” demonstrated “evident 

unfitness for service,” or for any cause that would warrant the denial of an application 

for a credential. Complainant alleges three causes for discipline against respondent’s 

credentials including unprofessional conduct, immoral conduct, and acts of moral 

14 

turpitude. Complainant seeks revocation of respondent’s credentials. Respondent 

seeks to have the action dismissed. 

6. 

Unprofessional conduct is conduct that “violates the rules or ethical code 

of a profession or such conduct which is unbecoming a member of a profession in 

good standing.” (

(1953) 41 Cal.2d 546, 553 [citation 

omitted], overruled, in part, on another ground in 

(1972) 

6 Cal.3d 575, 588, fn. 7.)  

Respondent’s failure to perform his duty as a mandated reporter in his position 

as an administrator constituted unprofessional conduct, and cause for discipline exists 

under Education Code section 44421, as set forth in Factual Findings 7-24 and 38.

7. 

“The term ‘immoral’ has been defined generally as that which is hostile to 

the welfare of the general public and contrary to good morals.” (

(1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811 [citation omitted].) Immorality has not been 

confined to sexual matters, but includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or 

indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; or as willful, flagrant, or 

shameless conduct showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable 

members of the community, and as an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and 

the public welfare.” (

., at p. 972.) 

Based upon the matters set forth in Factual Findings 7-24, 39 and 40, it is found 

that respondent’s conduct, while unprofessional, did not amount to immoral conduct. 

There was no evidence that respondent was dishonest or engaged in corruption, 

indecency, or showed moral indifference to community opinions. Accordingly, cause 

for adverse action does not exist under Education Code section 44421 based on 

immoral conduct.

15 

8.

Education Code section 44345, subdivision (e), provides that the 

Commission may deny an application for a credential or for the renewal of a credential 

by any person who has “committed any act involving moral turpitude.” “Moral 

turpitude” has been defined as an act that is contrary to honesty and good morals. (

(1991) 52 Cal.3d 968, 978;

179 

Cal.App.2d at p. 811 [citation omitted].) Courts have defined “moral turpitude” to be 

“any crime or misconduct committed without excuse, or any ‘dishonest or immoral’ act 

not necessarily a crime.” (

(1979) 98 Cal.App.3d 167, 181.) Moral turpitude 

has also been defined as conduct involving acts of “baseness, vileness or depravity in 

the private and social duties which a man owes to his fellow men, or to society in 

general, contrary to accepted and customary rule of right and duty between man and 

man.” (

(1968) 68 Cal.2d 67, 73.) 

Based upon the matters set forth in Factual Findings 7-24, 39 and 40, it is found 

that respondent’s conduct, while unprofessional, did not amount to moral turpitude. 

The evidence did not establish that respondent was dishonest or engaged in conduct 

involving acts of vileness or depravity. Accordingly, cause for adverse action for moral 

turpitude does not exist under Education Code section 44421 and 44345, subdivision 

(e).

Relationship of Misconduct to Fitness for Credentials 

9. 

In accordance with 

(1969) 1 Cal.3d 

214 and California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80302, an examination must be 

made to determine the relationship between the misconduct and the credential 

holder’s fitness, competence, or ability to perform the duties authorized by the 

credential. Factors to be considered include, but are not limited to, the following: 

(1) likelihood that the conduct may have adversely affected students, fellow teachers, 

16 

or the educational community, and the degree of such adversity anticipated; 

(2) proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct; (3) type of credential held; 

(4) extenuating or aggravating circumstances surrounding the conduct; 

(5) praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the conduct; 

(6) likelihood of recurrence of the conduct; (7) the extent to which disciplinary action 

may inflict an adverse impact or chilling effect upon the constitutional rights of the 

person involved or other certified persons; and (8) the publicity or notoriety given to 

the conduct.  

10.  Only the most pertinent 

 factors need be considered in a 

particular case. (

(1993) 16 

Cal.App.4th 1766, 1777.) The factors may be applied to the charges in the aggregate, 

considering the totality of the teacher’s offensive conduct. (

(1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 

1444.) 

11. 

Upon a consideration of the pertinent 

factors, it is determined 

that respondent’s misconduct was related to his fitness, competence, and ability to 

discharge the duties authorized by his credentials and cause for adverse action exists 

under Education Code section 44421. Respondent engaged in unprofessional conduct

when he failed to fulfill his duties as a mandated reporter when he knew that students 

had been physically assaulted by the teacher. However, respondent credibly testified 

that his misconduct stemmed from his lack of support and inexperience at being an 

administrator. It was not established on this record that respondent possessed 

additional motivations of an improper nature or that his conduct involved dishonesty. 

Respondent has taken a course on mandated reporting to ensure this type of conduct 

does not reoccur in the future. It is also noted that respondent has worked for 

17 

approximately 15 years as an educator in high schools without complaints of 

inappropriate conduct. 

It is likely that knowing that an administrator had failed in his duty as a 

mandated reporter would adversely affect both students and teachers. Respondent’s 

misconduct occurred while he was the dean of students at a middle school, serving as 

an ultimate role model for both students and teachers. He failed to do so. 

It is an aggravating factor that respondent’s misconduct was surrounded by his 

violation of the law requiring mandatory reporting. It is also an aggravating factor that 

respondent’s unprofessional conduct likely allowed additional harm to come to 

students and thereby harmed the public or the educational system.  

“Mitigating factors” are circumstances demonstrating that the public, 

schoolchildren, and the profession would be adequately protected by a more lenient 

degree of adverse action. (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80300, subd. (m).) Respondent has 

shown a number of mitigating factors. He has no prior record of adverse action over 

many years of service as an educator. Respondent provided a strong character 

reference from a teacher who worked at the middle school. Most importantly, 

respondent accepted responsibility for his actions and completed a Mandated 

Reporter: Child Abuse and Neglect training program. 

Determination of Discipline 

12. 

As determined above, cause for discipline exists; the question remains as 

to what adverse action is appropriate. Revocation which might result in ending 

respondent’s career as an educator and administrator is too extreme based upon the 

evidence presented and would be punitive. However, dismissal of the action is also not 

warranted. Respondent’s conduct did not involve dishonest or immoral conduct. He 

18 

accepted responsibility for his failure to act upon his duty as a mandated reporter and 

has taken a course in mandated reporting. It appears that his inexperience as an 

administrator and mistakes in judgment were the catalyst for his failings because he 

should have reported the incidents instead of amassing a file of incident statements. 

Under the circumstances, the public interest will be sufficiently protected by 

suspending respondent’s credentials for a period of 90 days. This discipline is 

consistent with the recommendation of the Committee of Credentials and will impress 

upon respondent the seriousness of his misconduct and the need to handle similar 

situations differently in the future.

ORDER

All credentials, certificates and authorizations issued to respondent Brandon 

Anthony Jones are suspended for a period of 90 days.

DATE:

REGINA BROWN

Presiding Administrative Law Judge

Office of Administrative Hearings

19

