BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Consolidated Matter of the Accusation and Statement 

of Issues Against: 

THOMAS GUTIERREZ, Respondent. 

Agency Case No. 2-21933751 

OAH Nos. 2021100517, 2021100518 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Administrative Law Judge Deena R. Ghaly, Office of Administrative Hearings, 

State of California, heard these consolidated matters on May 3, 4, and 5, 2022, by 

videoconference. 

Deputy Attorney General Stephanie J. Lee represented Complainant Mary Vixie 

Sandy, Ed.D., in her official capacity as the Executive Director of the Commission on 

Teacher Credentialing (Commission). Attorney James Kosnett represented Respondent 

Thomas Gutierrez, who was present throughout the hearing.

Documents and testimony were received in evidence. The record was closed,

and the matter submitted for decision on May 5, 2022. 

Motion for Protective Order

Complainant moved for a protective order to protect the identities of students 

involved in the matter. A list of the students’ names is attached to the motion. 

Complainant subsequently amended the motion to add an additional name to the list 

of confidential names. Respondent did not oppose the original motion or its 

amendment. 

Complainant’s amended motion for a protective order is granted. The 

individuals named in the list will be identified by their initials only in any transcript of 

the hearing. The confidential names lists attached to Complainant’s motion for a 

protective order and amended motion for a protective order are sealed. 

Motion in Limine Rulings 

Complainant moved to exclude three of Respondent’s exhibits, marked BBB, 

CCC, and IIII for identification, and any reference to the information therein during the 

hearing.

Exhibit BBB is a summary of an incident central to Complainant’s allegations 

prepared by Rene Barrera, then a school police officer who was present during the 

incident. The summary includes a statement that two of the students were “girlfriends.” 

The students in the summary are referenced by first name. In the motion, Complainant 

objects to the summary and to any testimony by Mr. Barrera (he is erroneously 

identified as Ms. Barrera in the motion) on grounds Exhibit BBB is hearsay, constitutes 

“improper” administrative hearsay, lacks foundation, Mr. Barrera lacks personal 

knowledge of the matters therein, its use may infringe privacy rights under federal and 

state law, it constitutes improper character evidence, and its probative value is 

outweighed by its prejudicial effect. 

2

Complainant makes similar objections to Exhibits CCC, a summary from another 

school police officer, Sergeant Thomas Langston, who also testified at the hearing. 

Sergeant Langston’s summary and part of his testimony referenced a statement he 

heard by one of the alleged student victims to the effect that she intends to retaliate 

against Respondent for cooperating with police to apprehend another student, her 

boyfriend at the time. Exhibit IIII is a subpoena ordering Respondent to appear at the 

boyfriend’s criminal trial. 

Under the relaxed evidentiary rules governing administrative hearings, hearsay 

may be admissible to the extent it explains or supplements direct evidence. (See Gov. 

Code, § 11513, subd. (d).) Here, Mr. Barrera testified at the hearing, laying an 

evidentiary foundation, including detailed information reflecting his knowledge of 

circumstances as an eyewitness. His testimony is direct evidence and his summary, 

prepared closer to the time of the incident, supplements the testimony. Both Mr. 

Barrera’s summary and testimony make passing reference to a potentially romantic 

relationship between the students, also noted by one of the students herself during 

her testimony, as context for some of the developments Mr. Barrera witnessed. The 

students’ privacy is protected by using first names or initials throughout the 

proceeding and that protection is extended by a protective order. The concern about

the prejudicial effect of this information is not warranted.

The same analysis applies to Sergeant Langston’s summary and testimony, 

including his recounting of a student’s statement. Again, to protect privacy, the 

students referenced are identified only by first names or initials. Their specific 

identities are not at issue but, because this case involves charges based on the reports 

of one of them, evidence relevant to that student’s potential motive to be untruthful 

or act in a retaliatory manner is relevant and more probative than prejudicial. 

3

 
Exhibit IIII is a subpoena for Respondent to appear at a criminal case for one of 

the students, the boyfriend. As described above, this too is relevant to Respondent’s 

defense regarding students’ motive to be untruthful or retaliatory and excluding such 

evidence would imperil Respondent’s right to a fair hearing. 

Under these circumstances, Complainant’s objections to Exhibits BBB, CCC, and 

IIII and the related objection to exclude testimony or argument involving the subject 

matters addressed in the exhibits are overruled. The exhibits are admitted and 

testimony and argument related to them is also admitted.

SUMMARY 

Complainant seeks to discipline Respondent’s expired Clear Administrative 

Services Credential, Clear Multiple Subject Teaching Credential and Administrative 

Services Credential Certificate of Eligibility as well as to deny his application for a new 

Clear Administrative Services Credential and Clear Multiple Subject Teaching 

Credential. Complainant’s position is based on allegations he sexually harassed 

students while serving as the assistant principal for operations at Jordan High School 

in the Los Angeles Unified School District (LAUSD). Complainant contended

Respondent’s actions constitute unprofessional conduct, immoral conduct, evident 

unfitness for service, and moral turpitude.

Complainant’s case rested primarily on the testimony of two students, RM and 

LS. RM stated Respondent caused her distress and discomfort by, among other 

actions, placing his hand on her knee and then on an exposed part of her thigh, and 

grazing the top of her breast while placing his arm around her shoulder. LS stated 

Respondent frequently bumped fists and side-hugged her and asked about the 

placement of a sticker on her chest in an embarrassing and intrusive way. Other 

4

 
students’ reports, relayed through teachers to a school administrator and eventually to

LAUSD and Commission investigators, involved descriptions of Respondent engaging 

in sexualized behavior, including leering at them, making comments referencing sexual 

matters, and generally making them uncomfortable. 

Respondent denied all allegations of sexual or otherwise inappropriate 

behavior. He also presented evidence corroborating his testimony disputing the 

incidents of, or even opportunity for, the misconduct alleged and of his longstanding 

reputation as a skilled and ethical educator. 

RM and LS testified credibly, particularly about their subjective perceptions and 

feelings after interactions with Respondent. RM, however, admitted the incidents as 

she remembers them occurred during periods when she was upset for unrelated 

reasons such that her perceptions could have been affected by these circumstances. 

Moreover, Respondent too was credible in his version of events, which he persuasively 

corroborated with other witnesses’ testimony and evidence. Complainant attempted to 

corroborate the most serious allegations with administrative hearsay evidence, which 

was less persuasive. 

Complainant has the burden of proof to prove the Accusation’s allegations 

against Respondent’s credentials and must do so by clear and convincing evidence. 

Respondent bears the burden of proof to establish his fitness for the new credentials 

he seeks and must do so by a preponderance of the evidence. Complainant failed to 

meet her burden. The direct evidence presented by Complainant through RM and LS’s 

testimony is credible but rebutted by at least equally credible countervailing evidence. 

As such, it does not meet the clear and convincing standard. Therefore, no grounds for 

disciplining Respondent’s existing credentials have been established and the charges 

must be dismissed. 

5

In the absence of a finding of sexual misconduct and with affirmative evidence 

of competence as an educator, Respondent met his burden to establish his 

qualifications and suitability to be issued a new Clear Administrative Services 

Credential and Clear Multiple Subject Teaching Credential. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS

Background and Jurisdictional Matters 

1.

During the 2017-2018 and 2018-2019 school years, Respondent was an 

assistant principal at LAUSD’s Jordan High School (Jordan). In March 2019, reports that 

Respondent engaged in sexual misconduct reached Jordan’s principal, Lucia Cerda. 

Principal Cerda immediately removed Respondent from his assistant principal position 

and reassigned him to LAUSD’s school operations office pending investigation. She 

also reported the matter to LAUSD headquarters and the Los Angeles Police 

Department (LAPD). 

2.

On June 20, 2019, LAUSD reclassified Respondent to Elementary Teacher 

for the 2019-2020 school year, a demotion. On September 6, 2019, Respondent 

resigned from LAUSD while its investigation was pending. He commenced a new 

position as Assistant Principal of Ramona Middle School in the Bonita Unified School 

District. While at Ramona Middle School, Respondent discovered he could not renew 

his administrative and teaching credentials because LAUSD had referred the matter to 

the Commission. The Commission is responsible for issuing and disciplining teacher 

and administrator credentials for California public school educators and undertook its 

own investigation. 

/// 

6

3.

On July 21, 2020, pursuant to its authority under Education Code sections 

44242.5 and 44244 (further statutory cites are to the Education Code unless otherwise 

designated), the Commission’s Committee of Credentials (Committee) found probable 

cause to commence a disciplinary action against Respondent. Respondent timely 

requested an administrative hearing to challenge the charges, triggering a 

requirement pursuant to section 44242.5 to file an Accusation initiating this 

adjudicatory hearing. 

4. 

On November 25, 2019, Respondent signed and submitted applications 

to the Commission for a Clear Administrative Services Credential and a Clear Multiple 

Subject Teaching Credential. Based on the Committee’s probable cause finding 

regarding Respondent’s existing credentials, the Commission denied Respondent’s 

applications. Respondent requested an administrative hearing to challenge the denials, 

also triggering a requirement pursuant to section 44242.5 to file a Statement of Issues, 

also signed and issued by Complainant.

Respondent’s Credentials 

5. 

On April 22, 2015, the Commission issued a Clear Administrative Services 

Credential to Respondent, which expired on November 1, 2019, and has not been 

renewed. On October 27, 2004, the Commission issued a Clear Multiple Subject 

Teaching Credential, which expired on November 1, 2019, and has not been renewed. 

On January 2, 2008, the Commission issued an Administrative Services Credential, 

Certificate of Eligibility, which does not expire. The credentials were in force and effect 

at the times relevant to the charges brought in the Accusation. 

6. 

Respondent held a Preliminary Administrative Services Credential from 

July 1, 2012 through August 1, 2017, a Preliminary Multiple Subject Teaching 

7

Credential from August 6, 2003 through September 1, 2008, an Emergency Long Term 

Multiple Subject Teaching Permit from February 1, 2000 through March 1, 2001, and 

an Emergency Substitute Teaching Permit for Prospective Teachers from January 8, 

1999 through February 1, 2000. 

Reports of Misconduct and the LAUSD Investigation

7. 

The chain of events leading to the instant matter began when Jordan 

teacher Javier Rodriguez, reported to its principal, Lucia Cerda, that he overheard a 

student, JC, state that she did not like Respondent because he was a “weirdo” and 

Respondent had touched her knee and rubbed her leg. In the same conversation, 

other female students stated Respondent made them uncomfortable. Student LS 

stated Respondent hugged her frequently and “checked her out.” 

8. 

After Principal Cerda referred the matter to LAUSD, its Student Safety 

Investigation Team (SSIT) began its review. SSIT investigators interviewed Mr. 

Rodriguez. Mr. Rodriguez told SSIT investigators he overheard students calling 

Respondent “creepy,” and stating he leered at them and called them pet names such 

as baby girl and mama.

9.

SSIT investigators interviewed Principal Cerda as well, who reported 

student LS had also told her Respondent side-hugged her frequently. The hugs always 

occurred in open places and other students saw them. Another student, CC, during the 

summer session between the 2017-2018 and 2018-2019 academic years, reported to 

Principal Cerda Respondent took her out of class and told her she should look up the 

meaning of a tattoo design she was wearing and asked her if she was a prostitute.

10.

In addition to Mr. Rodriguez and Principal Cerda, another staff member

interviewed by SSIT investigators reported being told Respondent stood close to the

8

legs of a student, RM, and made her feel cornered and that, on another occasion,

Respondent stood “Captain Morgan style” with one foot up on a bench where she sat. 

11. 

SSIT investigators also spoke directly to some of the students named as 

potential victims by Jordan faculty. “The complaints by the female students involved 

[Respondent] touching students inappropriately and staring at the chest area of 

female students.” (Exh. 6, p. A121.) LR (names of students in the SSIT report were 

redacted to first initial or first and last initial; LS is sometimes identified as L) reported 

repeated unwanted hugs from Respondent and RM and JC reported Respondent had 

put his hand on their inner thigh. 

12. 

The SSIT investigation noted the Los Angeles Police Department had 

been notified by school personnel and conducted its own investigation and that the 

matter was referred to the Los Angeles City Attorney’s Office. A subsequent letter from 

the Los Angeles City Attorney’s Office stated the matter had been closes without 

further action though the file would be kept open for one year. 

13. 

SSIT investigators stated in the report that they obtained documents 

reflecting past disciplinary actions against Respondent. According to the report, 

Respondent’s past disciplinary history consisted of the following: 

[Respondent] was issued a Conference Memorandum dated 

May 20, 2011 at Parmalee Avenue School, from Principal 

Laurent Hernandez, regarding a complaint from a 

paraprofessional alleging that he made inappropriate 

comments to her regarding her marriage. The 

Memorandum also noted that this was not the first incident 

9

where a Teacher Assistant complained about unprofessional 

comments by {Respondent]. 

[Respondent] was issued a Conference Memorandum dated 

March 28, 2012 at Parmalee Avenue School from Principal 

Laurent Hernandez, regarding a formal Title IX complaint by 

a Teacher alleging that [Respondent] used his position as a 

Coordinator to get information from a Teacher Assistant 

about her. [Respondent] was also accused of spreading 

rumors about the Teacher and another staff member having 

a “feud” on Facebook. The Memorandum also directed 

[Respondent to refraim] from intimidating or taking any 

action considered retaliatory towards any student or others 

filing a complaint. 

An interoffice correspondence dated February 7, 2014 was 

issued by Assistant Principal Jose Gonzalez regarding 

insubordinate behavior by [Respondent] during 

[Respondent’s] tenure as Interim Principal at John Muir 

Middle School. [Respondent] alleged that [Respondent] 

created a hostile and untrustworthy environment among 

Administration and Certificated Staff. Mr. Gonzalez cited 

{Respondent] with lack of confidentiality of staff meeting 

information, defiance, and retaliation towards teachers in 

disagreement with him. Fourteen other complaints from 

staff were submitted against [Respondent] citing 

unprofessional behavior. 

10 

A complaint was filed on February 11, 2019 by Andres 

Fresquez, Special Education Teacher at Jordan High School 

on behalf of LG, Adaptive Behavior Physical Education 

Teacher and JB, Math Teacher. 

(Exh. 6, pp. 130-131.) 

No disciplinary memoranda or any other documentation of prior disciplinary actions 

were introduced into the record. 

Commission Investigation

14. 

The Commission undertook its own investigation. A substantial portion of 

the Commission report addresses a sexual harassment complaint made by a part-time 

teacher. Her complaint is not addressed by the operative pleadings in the instant 

matter and is therefore not considered as a possible ground for discipline here.

15. 

In the Commission report, a student identified as LS or S reported 

wearing breast cancer awareness stickers on her chest as part of a school health event 

and that Respondent questioned her about why the stickers were placed there. 

According to the report, when LS asked why he was looking at her body, he responded 

“they are just there, how could I not look?” (Exh. 7, p. A138.) LS also told the 

Commission investigators about the incident with CC, stating CC told her Respondent 

had asked about a tattoo she had and whether she was a student. 

16.

As addendum to the Commission report, is a bulletin entitled “Code of 

Conduct with Students – Distribution and Dissemination Requirement.” The bulletin 

provides in pertinent part:

///

11 

the most important responsibility of all District employees is 

the safety of our students. While the District encourages the 

cultivation of positive relationships with students, 

employees and all individuals who work with or have 

contact with students are reminded that they must be 

mindful of the fine line drawn between being sensitive to 

and supportive of students and a possible or perceived 

breach of responsible, ethical behavior. Employees and all 

individuals who work with or have contact with students are 

expected to use good judgment and are cautioned to avoid 

the situations indicated in the “Code of Conduct with 

Students.” 

(Exh. 7, p. A147-148.) 

The rest of the bulletin is devoted to directions regarding distribution requirements of 

the Code of Conduct with Students and to reporting obligations to which faculty and 

staff are subject. The Code of Conduct with Students is not attached to the bulletin 

and was not otherwise introduced into the record. 

Student RM’s Testimony 

17. 

Student RM came to Jordan as a transfer student in her sophomore year, 

2017-2018. Although she was active in school activities, particularly sports, RM was 

unhappy during her time at Jordan. She candidly admitted to often leaving classes

without permission and otherwise disobeying school rules.

18. 

RM knew Respondent as an assistant principal and director of discipline 

during her time as a Jordan student. RM stated Respondent did several things which 

12 

made her feel uncomfortable and unsafe: he called her by pet names such as mija

(Spanish for “my daughter”), baby girl, and mama and she heard Respondent call other 

students by these names; during her sophomore year, on an occasion when RM 

“ditched” class and sat at an outdoor lunch table, Respondent joined her, putting a 

foot on the bench “Captain Morgan style,” while bending his knee toward her, causing 

his groin area to come within inches of her head; on another occasion, Respondent 

approached her as she was crying and began to rub her back then dropped his hand 

lower to the top of her pants’ waist band; during a disciplinary meeting, when RM 

lunged at another student and then walked out. Respondent followed her out and 

grabbed her shoulder, then wrapped his arm around her shoulders, his hand grazing 

the top of one of her breasts. A final incident involved Respondent approaching RM as 

she once again skipped class, rubbing her knee and then moving his hand up her thigh 

where it was exposed through her distressed jeans. 

19. 

RM reported Respondent’s actions to LAPD officers. The report was not 

introduced at the hearing. 

20. 

RM also testified mat she reported Respondent’s actions to Principal 

Cerda and a teacher, Ms. Yates. Neither Principal Cerda nor Ms. Yates were called to 

testify at the hearing. 

21. 

RM stated Respondent’s actions caused her great distress though she 

also noted she could not remember all details about what transpired between them 

because she was often already extremely upset for unrelated reasons during their 

encounters. Asked how long Respondent kept his hand on her thigh, she stated that 

she was crying and too upset to notice. At the disciplinary meeting, she was also 

extremely upset and ran out of the office before the meeting was over. 

13 

Student LS’s Testimony

22.

Student LS is currently 20 years old and a freshman in college with plans 

to become a mathematics teacher. She had been a transfer student into Jordan, 

entering as a sophomore in the 2016-2017 school year.

23. 

During the hearing, LS recounted an incident with Respondent when, as 

part of the school’s leadership team, she was involved with a breast cancer awareness 

event. As part of the event, stickers were distributed. LS wore hers on her chest. 

Respondent asked her whether she did so to draw attention to her breasts. LS asked 

why Respondent was looking at that part of her body and he replied by asking how 

could he help it.

24. 

LS reported the incident to Ms. Yates, the Leadership Team adviser and 

Principal Cerda. At the hearing, LS stated another student, CM had been with LS when 

the sticker incident occurred. CM did not testify at the hearing. 

Commission Expert 

25. 

Vince Carbino was called as Complainant’s expert witness. Dr. Carbino 

holds an Associates of Science degree in law enforcement, a Bachelor’s degree in 

public administration, a Master of Science degree in educational administration and 

counseling, and a Doctor of Education degree. He worked in law enforcement before 

becoming an educator and has been a school administrator for over 21 years. Dr. 

Carbino has written articles and participated in professional presentation with a 

particular focus on school safety, including adult sexual misconduct (ASM) prevention. 

He is currently the principal of City of Angels School, an independent study and online 

program specialty school. 

14 

26.

Dr. Carbino stated ASM encompasses a wide range of behaviors 

including “grooming,” meaning a gradual pattern of increasingly intimate contact 

between an adult and child intended to test the child’s proclivity to remain silent 

about the abuse. Additional forms of ASM are staring or leering and physical touch 

that “push the boundaries” and cause students discomfort. According to Dr. Carbino, 

ASM does not have to be overtly sexual. Special or excessive attention on a particular 

student can qualify. 

27. 

According to Dr. Carbino, the United States Department of Education’s 

publication, “A Training Guide for Administrators and Educators on Addressing Adult 

Sexual Misconduct in the School Setting (ASM Training Guide),” is the definitive text 

on the subject of ASM and is used in teacher and administrators’ periodic trainings to 

teach them about this issue and their responsibilities as educators.

28. 

Dr. Carbino opined that Respondent’s conduct, as alleged, clearly 

constituted ASM and grooming. Dr. Carbino believes Respondent was trying out 

relatively innocuous touching such as patting a knee or placing his hand on a student’s 

back, then gradually moving to more sexualized touching to see if the students 

tolerated his increasing levels of intimacy. He also stated Respondent’s hugging of 

students violated their boundaries and represented conduct generally to be avoided 

unless a student initiated it. Regarding comments Respondent allegedly made to CC 

about whether she was a prostitute and the location of the breast cancer awareness 

stickers on LS’s body, Dr. Carbino stated these were attempts to normalize sexual 

banter and to test the students’ defenses and level of tolerance. 

29. 

Dr. Carbino stated his opinions were based on a presumption of the 

veracity of the allegations against Respondent. He also stated he is comfortable 

15 

believing them because, in his experience, students do not make up allegations of this 

type. 

ASM Training Guide 

30. 

Pertinent provisions of the ASM Training Guide are as follows: 

Schools and school districts must demonstrate a strong 

commitment to elimination of behavior known as [ASM] by 

school personnel. Efforts to address ASM are strengthened 

by policies and procedures that describe appropriate, 

allowable behaviors, identify inappropriate and illegal 

actions, and outline methods for addressing allegations of 

ASM in schools. 

It is important to note that ASM manifests in many ways, 

and the range of behaviors that may be considered 

inappropriate (from inappropriate to illegal) underlines the 

importance of clear policies and procedures that document 

the responsibilities of specific staff members for preventing 

ASM or the appearance of ASM. In many cases, behaviors 

that are considered ASM are subject to interpretation; 

therefore, these “grey areas” should be clearly spelled out in 

school and school district policies. 

Clear policies on boundaries for interpersonal contact 

protects both students and staff members. 

(Exh. 13, pp. A171-172.) 

16 

Hugging is listed among the “grey areas” subject to interpretation and needing 

clarification and direction by promulgating school policies. The publication does call 

out hugging “if the child is not receptive, if the staff member is hugging too often or 

for too long or if the contact is romanticized or sexually intimate” as examples of 

inappropriate conduct. (

. at p. A176.) 

Respondent’s Evidence 

31. 

Respondent testified at the hearing, stating he had had a lifelong interest 

in being an educator. His first administrative job was at John Muir Middle School in 

Pasadena. There he became versed in the alternate disciplinary system known as 

“restorative justice,” which stresses respectful interactions and mediation-influenced 

approaches to diffuse and resolve disputes and misconduct. He continued practicing 

its methods at Jordan where his duties included disciplining both students and 

teachers. 

32. 

Respondent maintained he was equally aware of the need to approach 

his duties with care and his own safety in mind. This is because Respondent’s duties at 

Jordan and other schools included direct involvement with dispensing discipline, 

sometimes even reporting to and cooperating with law enforcement and he believed 

this sometimes prompted subjects to retaliate against him. To protect himself, he

never met with students alone, never closed his office door when meeting with 

students there and never touched them except for giving them side-hugs, a physical 

display of comfort and support he felt could not be interpreted as sexual or overly 

familiar.

///

///

17 

33.

Respondent further stated he generally knows students’ names and if he 

does not know, he refers to them as “young man” or “young lady.” He denied calling 

any students baby girl, mama or any similar terms. 

34. 

Regarding the specific allegations, Respondent adamantly denied leering 

or staring at students, touching RM’s knee or leg or rubbing or touching any part of 

her back, or standing “Captain Morgan style” in front of her. 

35. 

Respondent has his own recollections of some of the specific incidents at 

issue. He recollects LS was one of the students he side-hugged, reiterating he does 

this with many students, both boys and girls. Respondent submitted pictures of 

himself with students, shoulders touching and Respondent’s arm around to the 

student’s far shoulder. (See Exh. MMMM.) Respondent also recalled commenting on 

the breast cancer stickers LS wore, but denied commenting on the stickers’ placement 

on LS’s body. He recalls asking LS where he could get his own sticker because he 

wanted to also show his support for the event. He recalled questioning CC about 

whether she understood the implications of the tattoo she had, a money bag with 

dollar bills seeming to fly out of it, because he knew it to be associated with sex 

trafficking and believed she may not have known that. For her own protection, he 

wanted her to look up its meaning and consider whether she should display it on her 

person. 

36. 

Respondent did not have an independent recollection of particular 

instances involving speaking to RM as she sat at the lunch tables instead of going to 

class. He noted, however, this was not an uncommon occurrence at Jordan and it was 

his practice and his duty to approach students who failed to report to class. Consistent 

with his practices in other circumstances, though, he called for assistance from 

members of the security team who would join him while he addressed the situation. 

18 

37.

Respondent recalled the disciplinary meeting with RM. As Respondent 

described it, he convened the meeting to address a conflict RM had with another 

student, V, with whom RM was in a dating relationship. RM had seen V with another 

student, G. RM understood V’s interactions with G were also romantic and became 

angry and had a loud confrontation with V. Respondent, to diffuse the situation, had 

all the students involved come in his office along with members of his safety team. 

There he attempted to hold a “harm circle,” a restorative justice exercise intended to 

help resolve such issues. The atmosphere only grew more heated, however, and at 

some point, RM lunged toward V. Respondent physically restrained RM by the 

shoulders but denied otherwise touching her. 

38. 

Because Respondent was also responsible for disciplining teachers, he 

maintained that, despite his best efforts to approach his duties with equanimity and 

fairness, they too could become quite angry with him. Respondent recounted he had 

disciplined Teacher JR at least twice, once for wearing an inappropriate costume to 

school and once because he resisted allowing a student who had been disruptive back 

into the classroom. 

39. 

Respondent introduced the testimony of Inga Garrett, Rene Isidro 

Barrera, and Thomas Langston, all members of Respondent’s security team at Jordan. 

Ms. Garrett has been a security guard at Jordan for almost 35 years. Mr. Barrera 

recently resigned from the Orange County Sheriff’s Department. Before that he was 

with the LAUSD police department, assigned to Jordan and worked with Respondent 

there. Thomas Langston is an LAUSD police sergeant assigned to Jordan where he 

worked with Respondent from fall 2018 to winter 2019. 

40. 

The three witnesses corroborated Respondent’s testimony regarding his 

practice of conducting student interviews with security team members present. Ms. 

19 

Garrett stated it is her practice to continually circle the campus and routinely helped 

Respondent retrieve wayward students. Sergeant Langston noted there are some 42 

security cameras trained on many areas of the campus, including the lunch tables. In a 

letter submitted at the hearing, Jordan Plant Manager Clarence Lucky stated he met 

with Respondent in Respondent’s office on a daily basis and, during these meetings, 

students routinely arrived. Respondent asked Mr. Lucky to stay in the office while he 

spoke to the students. (See Exh. NN.) 

41.  Mr. Barrera recalled being present for the disciplinary meeting involving 

RM, V, and G, including that RM lunged toward V during the meeting. Speaking of 

Respondent and himself, Mr. Barrera stated “We got between her and the others.” 

42.  Mr. Barrera and Sergeant Langford corroborated Respondent’s testimony 

regarding the retaliatory dynamic he experienced as the school’s chief disciplinarian. 

Mr. Barrera stated RM was very close to V and blamed Respondent when, as a result of 

the altercation between them, V’s mother removed V from Jordan. Sergeant Langston 

was present when Respondent assisted police in apprehending a student in the course 

of a criminal investigation. That student was known to be JC’s boyfriend and Sergeant 

Langston heard her call out “I’m going to get you, Mr. G.” as police took him away. 

Respondent was subsequently subpoenaed to testify at his trial. (Exh. IIII.) 

43. 

Respondent presented extensive character and reputational evidence. His 

former supervisor at John Muir Middle School, Dr. Nisha Dugal, testified about his 

professionalism and capacity to handle students effectively and respectfully. Parent 

Educator Coach Cynthia Iglesias, also a former supervisor of Respondent’s, testified 

about Respondent’s talent as an educator and commitment to the profession. Both 

witnesses stated they were familiar with the charges against Respondent and both 

20 

stated the information did not change their position. Ms. Iglesias added she would not 

hesitate to leave her own daughter in the classroom with him. 

44. 

Respondent presented 46 letters of support. Of those, 21 did not indicate 

knowledge of the charges and therefore were given little weight. Three others came 

from direct family members, Respondent’s wife and two of his children. Though 

apparently sincere in their support, these writers’ close relationship to Respondent 

necessarily diminish their objectivity and for that reason, the letters were discounted.

45. 

The remaining 22 letters, from all aspects of Respondent’s professional 

and personal life, reflect knowledge of the pending charges and nonetheless 

demonstrate a nearly uniform pattern of support and unreserved belief in 

Respondent’s integrity and commitment to his profession.

Analysis 

46. 

The charges against Respondent, particularly when considered in the 

aggregate, are extremely serious and disturbing. The evidence presented, however, 

definitively established only a subset of the allegations. Respondent admits to certain 

of the allegations, touching RM, though in the context of preventing her from 

potentially injuring another student, side-hugging LS and speaking to her about 

stickers related to a breast cancer awareness event, and asking whether CC understood 

the implications of her tattoo. In the students’ version, these events and others to 

which Respondent does not admit, were infused with sexual intention and more 

pointed. In Respondent’s version, the events were routine arms-length encounters and 

part of a work protocol intentionally designed to avoid impropriety. He expressly 

denies sexual touching and commentary. The students are credible but their views, 

perhaps tainted by the emotions of the situation, leave room for interpretation.

21 

47.

Complainant relies on the direct evidence presented by the testifying 

witnesses and reports documented in out-of-court statements in investigation reports. 

This hearsay evidence, especially in contrast with the direct evidence corroborating 

some of Respondent’s version of key incidents (such as the disciplinary meeting 

involving RM), potential retaliatory motives behind some of the reporting Complainant 

has relied upon, and the protocol Respondent employed to avoid being alone with 

students, is insufficient to establish the disputed facts, which are by far the most 

serious of the allegations. And, as noted in the Legal Conclusions below, the 

undisputed facts generally do not constitute grounds for discipline as alleged in the 

Accusation or grounds to deny Respondent’s applications for new credentials as set 

out in the Statement of Issues. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

Jurisdiction 

1. 

Pursuant to Education Code section 44440, subdivision (b) (subsequent 

statutory cites are to the Education Code), suspension or expiration of Commission-

issued credential does not deprive the Commission of jurisdiction to impose discipline, 

including suspending or revoking the credential or issuing a letter of public reproval or 

private admonition to the credential holder.

2.

Section 44421 authorizes the Commission to take adverse action against 

an individual’s teaching credential for, among many specified causes, immoral or 

unprofessional conduct, evident unfitness for service, or any cause which would 

warrant denial of an application for a credential. Section 44345, subdivision (e), allows 

22 

the Commission to deny an application by any applicant who has committed an act 

involving moral turpitude. 

Burden and Standard of Proof 

3. 

Complainant has the burden of establishing by clear and convincing 

evidence to a reasonable certainty cause for adverse action against Respondent’s 

credential and certificate, because they are considered professional licenses. (See 

1038-1039; 

 (1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035, 

 (1982) 135 Cal.App.3d 853, 

855–856.) Clear and convincing evidence is “of such convincing force that it 

demonstrates, in contrast to the opposing evidence, a high probability of the truth of 

the fact[s] for which it is offered as proof.” (

(1997) 52 Cal.App.4th 820, 847.) 

Causes for Adverse Action (Accusation) 

UNPROFESSIONAL CONDUCT 

4. 

Under section 44421, a licensee may subject his credentials to 

disciplinary actions for committing acts constituting unprofessional conduct. 

Unprofessional conduct in the teaching profession is defined as conduct violating the 

rules or ethical code of the profession or conduct unbecoming of a member of the 

profession in good standing. (

 (1953) 41 Cal.2d 

546, 553, overruled on other grounds by 

 (1972) 6 Cal.3d 575.) 

5. 

In this case, it is unclear what rules of the profession, if any, are at issue in 

the Commission’s charges. There are references to a code of conduct in the bulletin 

attached to the Commission’s report but the bulletin is about its distribution; the code 

23 

 
itself was never produced. (Factual Finding 16.) Indeed, no applicable rule or code was 

presented and therefore no finding of its violation can be made. Alternatively, the 

allegations, considered as a whole, can be reasonably determined to constitute 

‘conduct unbecoming,’ in a common sense understanding of the phrase. Most of the 

allegations, however, were not proven. (Factual Findings 46 and 47.) Based on the 

direct evidence presented coupled with Respondent’s admissions, clear and convincing 

evidence established Respondent physically restrained RM during a disciplinary 

meeting, side-hugged LS, and spoke to CC about her tattoo and LS about breast 

cancer awareness stickers, though the content of the conversations in the latter two is 

in dispute. These occurrences alone likely fall into the “gray zone” of conduct 

described in ASM Training Guide. The ASM Training Guide recognizes such gray zone 

behavior must be addressed through thoughtful policies promulgated in advance so 

educators have clear foreknowledge of acceptable behavior. (Factual Finding 30.) Here, 

Complainant has not demonstrated such policies exist, much less that Respondent 

violated them when he engaged in the undisputed conduct at issue. 

6. 

Regarding other aspects of the allegations – touching RM’s and other 

students’ thighs, calling them by pet names, leering at them, asking whether CC is a 

prostitute, noting the placement of the breast awareness sticker on LS’s chest – these, 

no doubt, constitute conduct unbecoming but have not been established. (Factual 

Findings 45 and 46.) 

IMMORAL CONDUCT 

7. 

Under section 44421, a licensee may subject his credentials to 

disciplinary action for committing acts of immoral conduct. Immoral conduct has been 

defined generally as “that which is hostile to the welfare of the general public and 

contrary to good morals. [It] includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative 

24 

of corruption, indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; or as willful, flagrant, or shameless 

conduct showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the 

community, and as an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public 

welfare.” (

.) The conduct in question does not have to be related 

to a sexual offense. (

.) 

addressed disciplining a teacher’s credentials for 

falsifying attendance records to secure employment.

8. 

Given Complainant did not prove the majority of the allegations, and in 

particular, did not prove the overall pattern of inappropriate behavior, the record does 

not support a finding that Respondent engaged in immoral conduct as it is defined in 

the context of teacher and school administrator practice. 

EVIDENT UNFITNESS FOR SERVICE 

9. 

Under section 44421, a licensee may subject his credential to disciplinary 

action by demonstrating evident unfitness for service. “Evident unfitness for service” 

means clearly not fit, not adapted to or unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of 

temperamental defects or inadequacies. (

unfitness for service’ connotes a fixed character trait, presumably not remediable 

merely on receipt of notice that one’s conduct fails to meet the expectations of the 

(1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444.) “‘Evident 

employing school district.” (

.)

10. 

Again, here, the limited conduct proven under applicable standards does 

not constitute temperamental inadequacies. Respondent’s affirmative reputational 

evidence establishes the contrary, namely temperament, skills, and work policies and 

procedures consistent with the practices of competent educators. 

25 

MORAL TURPITUDE

11.

Under section 44421 and 44345, subdivision (c), a licensee may subject 

his credentials to disciplinary action for committing acts of moral turpitude. Under 

section 44345, subdivision (e), license applications may be denied for committing acts 

of moral turpitude. “Moral turpitude” has been defined as “everything done contrary 

to justice, honesty, modesty or good morals.” (

 (1979) 89 Cal.App.3d 30, 36.) As with the allegations of immoral conduct, nothing 

in the record supports such a finding. 

ORDER 

1. 

Complainant’s charges of unprofessional conduct, immoral conduct, 

unfitness for service, and moral turpitude against Respondent Thomas Gutierrez are 

dismissed as insufficient grounds to discipline his expired Clear Administrative Services 

Credential and Clear Multiple Subject Teaching Credential. 

2.

Respondent Thomas Gutierrez’s applications for a Clear Administrative 

Services Credential and for a Clear Multiple Subject Teaching Credential are granted.

DATE:

DEENA R. GHALY

Administrative Law Judge

Office of Administrative Hearing

26 

