BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the First Amended Accusation Against: 

JON PATRICK KELLER, Respondent. 

Agency Case No. 2-118955714 

and 

In the Matter of the Statement of Issues Against 

JON PATRICK KELLER, Respondent. 

Agency Case No. 2-24606608 

OAH No. 2021100139 

PROPOSED DECISION

Nana Chin, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ), Office of Administrative Hearings 

(OAH), State of California, heard this matter by videoconference on March 21 and 22, 

2022. 

Complainant Mary Vixie Sandy, Ed.D., Executive Director of the California 

Commission on Teacher Credentialing (Commission or CTC) was represented by Mario 

Cuahutle, Deputy Attorney General. 

Respondent Jon Patrick Keller appeared and was represented by Amit Singh, 

Esq., Rothschild Wishek & Sands LLP. 

On March 21, 2022, the ALJ ruled on motions in limine brought by Complainant 

and Respondent. Complainant moved to exclude JF’s records from the CTC and the 

Alhambra Unified School District (District or Alhambra). The motion was granted as to 

the CTC records but was denied as to the District records. Respondent’s motion 

requesting that paragraph 18 of the First Amended Accusation and Statement of 

Issues be stricken on the basis of estoppel was denied as the Committee’s letter to 

Respondent did not constitute an adjudication. Respondent’s second motion ordering 

JF to testify by videoconference was moot as JF intended and did testify by 

videoconference. 

Testimony and documentary evidence was received. The record closed and the 

matter was submitted for decision on March 22, 2022. 

SUMMARY 

Complainant seeks to revoke Respondent’s teaching credentials and 

certification and deny his application for a teaching credential based on: (1) a single 

1995 DUI conviction that had previously been disclosed to the Commission; and (2) 

conduct alleged to have occurred between 2016 and 2018. Many of the allegations 

contained in the Accusation were not established. Of the allegations that were 

established, Complainant failed to establish that they were grounds for discipline. 

The evidence also established that Respondent currently holds a credential and 

had submitted the application for teaching credential in error. Accordingly, the First 

Amended Accusation and Statement of Issues are dismissed. 

2

FACTUAL FINDINGS

Parties and Jurisdiction 

1.

The Commission is responsible for the credentialing of public school 

teachers, including issuing credentials and taking adverse action against applicants 

and credential holders. An “adverse action” is defined in California Code of 

Regulations, title 5, section 80300, subdivision (a), as “a denial, a private admonition, 

public reproval, suspension or a revocation of one or more credentials.” 

2. 

The CTC’s Committee of Credentials (Committee) is responsible for 

investigating all alleged misconduct that may be cause for the CTC to take adverse 

action and the circumstances in mitigation and aggravation. (Ed. Code, § 44242.5, 

subd. (c).)

3. 

Respondent holds a Clear Single Subject Teaching Credential (Credential), 

with an authorization in Physical Education. The Credential was originally issued on 

June 10, 1995 and is scheduled to expire on June 1, 2025, unless renewed. (Exhibit 6 

indicates that the Credential was originally issued on May 10, 2000, however, the 

License Certification in Exhibit 2, pp. A59, A61, A63, A65, A71 and A73 states that the 

Credential was originally issued on June 10, 1995.) Respondent also holds a 

Crosscultural, Language and Academic Development Certificate (Certificate), issued on 

February 21, 2008. 

Respondent has previously held: (1) a Preliminary Five Year Single Subject 

Teaching Credential, valid from June 10, 1995, until July 1, 2000; (2) an Emergency 30-

Day Substitute Teaching Permit (Permit),  valid from September 1, 1992 until June 30, 

1993, that was reissued on July 1, 1993 and expired on June 30, 1994; (3) an 

3

 
Emergency Long Term Single Subject Teaching Permit, valid from September 1, 1994, 

until June 30, 1995; and (4) an Emergency Crosscultural, Language and Academic 

Development Certificate, valid from July 1, 2007 until August 1, 2008.

Before the incidents alleged herein, Respondent had no disciplinary 

history with his school district or the Commission. 

4. 

The Committee initiated an investigation after the Alhambra Unified 

School District (District or Alhambra) notified the Commission that Respondent 

resigned from the District while allegations of misconduct were pending pursuant to 

Education Code section 44242.5, subdivision (b)(3). 

5. 

During its January 15-17, 2020 meeting, the Committee found probable 

cause to recommend the revocation of Respondent’s credentials and certifications 

based on: (1) allegations related to Respondent’s conduct while employed at San 

Gabriel High School (San Gabriel) during the 2016 until 2018 school years; and (2) a 

February 29, 1996, misdemeanor conviction for violation Vehicle Code section 23152, 

subdivision (a) (driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs). The Committee 

notified Respondent of its finding on January 24, 2020, and Respondent timely 

appealed. 

6. 

The Committee denied Respondent’s request for reconsideration and 

Complainant filed the Accusation in her official capacity to initiate an adjudicatory 

hearing. Respondent requested a hearing on the merits by filing a Notice of Defense 

dated December 7, 2020. 

7. 

On April 20, 2020, the CTC received an application for a Certificate of 

Clearance from Respondent. On June 28, 2021, Complainant filed a First Amended 

Accusation and Statement of Issues, Case Numbers 2-24606608 and 2-118955714, 

4

 
(First Amended Accusation) alleging unprofessional conduct, immoral conduct, and 

acts of moral turpitude as grounds for discipline, and acts of moral turpitude as 

grounds for denial. 

1996 Criminal Conviction

8.

On February 29, 1996, in the criminal proceeding entitled

(Super. Ct. Los Angeles County, 1996, No. 

6GL00982), Respondent was convicted, on his plea of guilty, of one misdemeanor 

count of driving under the influence, in violation Vehicle Code section 23152, 

subdivision (a). The court found a factual basis for Respondent’s plea, suspended 

imposition of sentence and placed Respondent on summary probation for three years 

with terms and conditions, which included completion of a three-month licensed first 

offender alcohol and other drug education and counseling program and the payment 

of fines, penalties and restitution.

9. 

The facts and circumstances underlying this conviction are that on 

January 28, 1996, Respondent was driving under the influence with a blood alcohol 

content of 0.11 percent.

10.

Respondent had previously disclosed his 1996 conviction to the 

Commission. During its September 20-22, 2000 meeting, the Committee found that 

“[n]o clear relationship can be established between the acts or omissions alleged and 

fitness and competence. Therefore no further inquiry is warranted.”(Exh. H.)

Sexual Harassment/Discrimination Allegations 

11. 

At all times relevant to the First Amended Accusation, Respondent was 

employed by the District as a certificated employee at San Gabriel. JF began her 

5

employment at San Gabriel in 2016. JF was a teacher in the physical education (PE)

department and the coach of the San Gabriel girls’ basketball team. During the period 

JF was employed at San Gabriel, Respondent was serving as the Department chair (also 

referred to as Department head) of San Gabriel’s PE Department. 

TESTIMONY OF JF

12. 

JF met Respondent in April or May of 2016. Respondent had been part of 

the District panel that interviewed her. After the interview, JF claims Respondent called 

her to let her know that the principal of San Gabriel would soon be calling to offer her 

a position at the school. 

13. 

JF began working as a full-time PE teacher at San Gabriel in August 2016. 

Besides Respondent, there were two other teachers in the department her first year, 

Michelle Buchicchio and Carla Fujimoto. Both teachers were in offices close to hers. 

14. 

JF’s duties as a PE teacher required her to have daily interactions with 

Respondent. According to JF, Respondent almost immediately began giving her a level 

of attention he did not give to either Ms. Fujimoto or Ms. Buchicchio. Respondent 

would communicate with her daily by email, review her lesson plans and watch her 

classes. Though she was a new teacher, she did not have a lot of questions for 

respondent as she had Ms. Fujimoto and Ms. Buchicchio, “two experienced great 

teachers” to rely on.

15.

JF admitted she engaged in personal communications with Respondent 

as they came from similar backgrounds in that they both played on basketball teams, 

coached and they both had had an interest in Division 1 basketball. Respondent, 

however, would take their common interests and make the communications 

“uncomfortable.”

6

16.

JF also had social interactions with Respondent outside the school 

grounds. On only one occasion was that interaction outside the normal colleague 

relationship. On that occasion, Respondent had come by her apartment after he had 

dropped off his children while she was outside. She was on a walk and her boyfriend at 

the time, “Trevor,” called to tell her that Respondent had come by. When she came 

home, Respondent was there, having a beer with her boyfriend and appeared 

intoxicated. 

17.  When asked about other instances of harassment and discrimination, JF 

stated that Respondent would: (1) comment on the size of her breasts; (2) stare at her 

breasts; and (3) touch her inappropriately, on one occasion, slapping her on the butt 

as she walked out the door. PE attendant Eddie Mendez was present during the 

occasion and appeared “extremely caught off guard” by the incident. JF also stated 

Respondent gave her a bottle of vodka in a gift bag with a post-it saying “size 

matters.” 

18.  When asked further about other inappropriate conduct by Respondent, 

JF claimed he would send texts and emails to her personal account containing sexual 

innuendos and more explicitly referring to toys in the bedroom. 

19. 

JF and Respondent eventually had consensual sexual relations several 

times on school grounds and one time after she invited him to her home. JF stated she 

engaged in sexual relations with Respondent because she was “naïve.” She had “just 

got an incredible job with an incredible District” and the job at the time “meant the 

world to [her]” and she “felt incredibly pressured” because she was not tenured. JF did 

not testify, as alleged in the First Amended Accusation, that Respondent “threaten[ed] 

her tenure if JF did not comply with his sexual advances.” (Exh. 1, p. A47.) 

7

20.

JF claimed she ended their physical relationship in the fall of 2017. JF 

reportedly did not say anything to Respondent at the time as she did not think of it as 

a relationship and did not think she had to explain it to him. JF simply stopped going 

to the office early in the morning and responding to Respondent’s texts and calls.

21. 

Despite her efforts to avoid Respondent, JF continued to receive an 

excessive number of emails and texts from Respondent. Afterwards, JF described 

Respondent as being “relentless” and claimed she actively tried to avoid Respondent 

though JF did admit, however, that three to four months after their physical 

relationship ended, she had a negative interaction with another coach at San Gabriel 

for which she sought Respondent’s assistance. 

22. 

According to JF, she did not make any attempt to report Respondent’s 

behavior as she was “too scared,” and it was “his word against [hers].” 

23. 

In February 2018, the District placed JF on paid leave. JF was told she 

would not be offered tenure and would be non-reelected to her position. After she 

was released by the District, JF filed a civil suit against the District in June 2018. Many 

of the allegations JF appeared to have made in connection with the suit, as outlined in 

Exhibit 3, p. A87 and Exhibit 6, pp. A121, 123, were not repeated at the hearing. 

24. 

The only evidence of many of the acts of harassment and discrimination 

alleged in the First Amended Accusation, which included “making inappropriate 

advances, making inappropriate sexual comments, touching her backside on several 

occasions, continuously and repeatedly threatening her tenure if JF did not comply 

with [Respondent’s sexual advances], and engaged in sexual intercourse with JF on 

school premises,” was JF’s testimony. (Exh. 1.) None of the harassing texts or emails 

Respondent was alleged to have sent were offered into evidence and there was no 

8

statement or testimony from any witness to Respondent’s alleged misconduct. The

validity of the allegations, therefore, relies solely on JF’s credibility. 

25. 

At the hearing, however, evidence of an incident that reflected negatively 

on JF’s credibility was presented. Specifically, JF had volunteered at the Special 

Olympics in Long Beach. JF did not go to the event on the day she was scheduled. 

Instead, JF sent Ms. Fujimoto, the event coordinator, a text stating, “Trevor had been 

shot in a car in Hollywood.” JF denied she had lied and that she had sent the text in 

order to avoid volunteering at the event. JF claimed she was experiencing a “mental 

health crisis.” JF claimed she “accidentally” sent the text while she was dreaming. JF 

admitted she did not go to the event as “she didn’t want to do it” and did not inform 

Ms. Fujimoto under later that afternoon that the text had been sent in error. 

TESTIMONY OF MICHELLE BUCHICCHIO

26.  Michele Buchicchio wrote a character reference letter on Respondent’s 

behalf and testified at hearing. Her testimony was straightforward and direct.

27.  Ms. Buchicchio was a PE teacher for the District for 33 years before she 

retired in 2017. Ms. Buchicchio has known Respondent since he was hired to teach PE

and coach basketball at San Gabriel in 1998. Ms. Buchicchio worked with Respondent 

closely over the years and has been very impressed with Respondent as an educator 

on the occasions she observed him provide instruction to his students. His classes 

were inclusive, very innovative, fast-paced, and fun for students. Ms. Buchicchio was 

unaware of any complaints being filed against Respondent by students, parents or 

colleagues during the time they worked together.

28. Ms. Buchicchio was shocked by JF’s allegations against Respondent. JF 

had been hired the year before Ms. Buchicchio retired. During the year they worked 

9

together, Ms. Buchicchio often observed JF leaving her teaching area to go to 

Respondent’s teaching area. At no time did she get the impression Respondent was 

forcing JF to go to his area. Based on her observations, she believed Respondent had 

taken JF “under his wing.” Ms. Buchicchio did not find this behavior to be unusual as 

she would often observe Respondent mentoring both new teachers and student 

teachers. 

TESTIMONY OF CARLA FUJIMOTO

29. 

Carla Fujimoto wrote a letter in support and testified on Respondent’s 

behalf. Ms. Fujimoto was a PE teacher with San Gabriel for 36 years before she retired 

in May 2020. Ms. Fujimoto is familiar with both Respondent and JF. Ms. Fujimoto 

worked with Respondent for approximately 20 years. In the last eight years they 

worked together, he was the department chair, and therefore her “boss.” (During 

cross-examination, she later denied that Respondent’s position as department chair 

made him her “boss.”) 

30.  Ms. Fujimoto had many opportunities to observe Respondent teaching 

class and as department head. As an educator, Respondent was a popular teacher who 

was “very, very good” with students and made learning fun. As the department head, 

Respondent worked “really hard” to make the system work. Other than the complaints 

made by JF, she was not aware of any complaints made against Respondent by 

students, parents or other colleagues.

31.  Ms. Fujimoto also worked with JF the two school years she was at San 

Gabriel. Ms. Fujimoto noted that JF had difficulty coping when things did not go the 

way she wanted. Though Ms. Fujimoto was aware JF had not been offered tenure, she 

had not known at the time that JF had accused Respondent of sexual harassment and 

10 

discrimination. Ms. Fujimoto was also unaware that Respondent resigned because of 

JF’s accusation. According to Ms. Fujimoto, she was both surprised and not surprised 

by JF’s accusation. She was not surprised because, based on her knowledge of JF’s 

“personality, background and past employment,” “there always seemed to be a 

problem.” She was surprised by the accusation because she had never observed any 

untoward behavior by Respondent towards JF nor had JF ever complained to her 

about Respondent’s behavior. 

32.  Ms. Fujimoto denied observing Respondent showing JF more attention 

by spending more time with her and denied observing JF leaving her teaching area to 

go to Respondent’s teaching area. 

33.  Ms. Fuijimoto was familiar with the incident involving JF and the Special 

Olympics. According to Ms. Fujimoto, she was officiating the Special Olympics, and 

approached JF about volunteering for the event. JF told her that she had helped out 

before at the Special Olympics and really loved doing it and wanted to work it again. 

34. 

The morning JF was scheduled to work, Ms. Fuijimoto received a text 

from JF stating that “Trevor” (JF’s boyfriend) had been killed. She shared that 

information with the others and assigned another volunteer to work JF’s post. JF sent 

her a text later that afternoon stating that it had simply been a bad dream. Ms. 

Fuijimoto was appalled both by JF’s texts and the ensuing drama. A number of people 

who were present at the event were also familiar with Trevor’s father. The information 

Trevor had been killed was relayed to his father and it created “a mess.” (Ms. Fuijimoto 

later denied it was a “mess.”) 

11 

35. Ms. Fujimoto believes Respondent should keep his credential. She 

considers him to be an outstanding teacher, dedicated and a great leader who loves 

what he does and gets long with both students and colleagues. 

36.  Ms. Fujimoto’s testimony was somewhat confused and therefore less 

credible in that her recollection of events contradicted the recollection of others and 

her responses to questions during cross-examination contradicted her responses to 

questions during direct examination. Her testimony regarding the texts she received 

from JF the day JF was scheduled to volunteer at the Special Olympics, however, was

credited in that her testimony is corroborated by JF’s own testimony of the incident.

TESTIMONY OF DEBORA STONE

37. 

Debora Stone, the principal of San Gabriel, testified at hearing. Principal 

Stone was a credible witness. Her responses to questions were thoughtful and 

measured and there was no indication Principal Stone held any personal animosity 

towards either Respondent or JF.

38. 

Principal Stone has been the principal of San Gabriel for seven years. 

Before becoming principal, she was employed by the District for 15 years. As the 

principal, she is responsible for maintaining a safe and secure campus. As part of her 

duties, Principal Stone oversees the high school’s four offices, which include, 

Curriculum & Instruction, Counseling, Business & Activities and Student Support 

Services. She is assisted in her duties by five assistant principals.

39.

According to Principal Stone, department chairs are responsible for 

training department members, building a master schedule, and advocating on behalf 

of their department. They do not have any supervisory roles over the members in their 

Department or conduct evaluations of teachers. Teacher evaluations are part of her 

12 

oversight duties. Though Principal Stone will take input from the department chairs

when making decisions regarding tenure, she is the individual solely responsible for 

making tenure decisions. When making that decision to offer a teacher tenure,

Principal Stone considers both the candidate’s professionalism and whether the 

candidate is a good fit for the school. 

40. 

Principal Stone is familiar with JF. JF was a teacher at San Gabriel who did 

not pass probation in her second year. Respondent had no impact on her decision not 

to offer JF tenure. Her decision was based on JF’s work performance. JF had had 

incidents with students; complaints had been made about her by athletic directors 

from other schools; and JF would exhibit “elevated” or “escalated” behaviors. Principal 

Stone ultimately decided JF was not a good fit for the school and did not offer her 

tenure. Principal Stone was not aware that JF and Respondent had had a physical 

relationship until after JF was released from her employment. 

41. 

Principal Stone also is familiar with Respondent. They had a working 

relationship while Respondent was at San Gabriel. Before JF brought the allegations 

against Respondent, Principal Stone had never received any complaint of Respondent 

harassing, discriminating or engaging in acts of retaliation against another colleague. 

42. 

Principal Stone does recall an incident where she reached out while JF 

was a PE teacher at San Gabriel. JF shared that she was upset about something. When 

Principal Stone asked her what she was upset about, JF told her that she had received 

some upsetting text messages. Principal Stone asked her to share the messages with 

her and JF printed the messages out. The messages had been from Respondent and 

though she did not recall the exact messages, the general nature of the messages 

were that JF was a temporary employee and that she needed to “step up” and “pull her 

13 

weight” in the department, and that he had the ability to give that information to 

Principal Stone. 

43. 

The text messages did not contain any sexual content and there was no 

indication there was a quid pro quo arrangement between Respondent and JF. The 

text messages were all related to Respondent’s performance as a PE teacher. Principal 

Stone, however, found the text messages to be improper and spoke with Respondent 

about them. 

Respondent’s Testimony

44. 

Respondent is currently employed as an admissions advisor for ENTITY 

Academy (Entity), an all-women academy that is focused on mentoring and coaching 

women to bridge the gap between men and women. Before working for Entity, 

Respondent worked for two years in the admissions department of Summit College, a 

private postsecondary school. The last time Respondent used his Credential was when 

he was employed by the District.

45. 

Respondent agreed with some of JF’s testimony but disagreed with the 

majority of her testimony. Respondent agreed that he first met JF when he was on the 

District panel that interviewed her. Respondent denied that he called her before she 

signed the contract with San Gabriel, noting that he had, in fact, recommended 

another individual, a friend of his, be hired for the position offered to JF. 

46. 

Respondent was never JF’s supervisor. As the department chair, his duties 

were primarily administrative and though he supported probationary teachers, he did 

not evaluate any of the teachers and was not responsible for any employment 

decisions. 

14 

47.

Respondent agreed he had more interactions with JF than the other two 

teachers in his department. Respondent explained his level of attention was based on 

the facts: (1) JF was a new teacher and, when compared to Ms. Buchicchio and Ms. 

Fujimoto, she had a lot of learning to do; and (2) JF had asked for him to critique her 

coaching because she had never before coached high school basketball. He also 

agreed he visited JF’s classes but claimed JF visited his classes far more frequently and 

that he had to speak to her about leaving her class. 

48. 

According to Respondent, his relationship with JF began as a working 

relationship and became what he believed to be a close friendship. As JF had 

expressed a desire to grow as a coach, Respondent offered to take her to the college 

basketball games and practices of coaches with whom he was close. JF seemed to be 

very grateful for the opportunity. When he took her to these events, there were always 

other people with them, including, on one occasion, JF’s boyfriend. 

49. 

Respondent admitted to gifting JF the bottle of alcohol with the post-it 

note on it for her birthday. Before that occasion, JF had been at his house for a poker 

event and JF had expressed disappointment with the small amount of vodka 

Respondent had in his home. When he saw the large bottle of vodka, he thought it 

was the perfect gift for JF’s birthday. The post-it was meant to be a joke but he also 

knew it was a sexual innuendo. Afterwards, JF seemed very happy about the gift, 

showing both Ms. Buchicchio and Ms. Fujimoto the bottle claiming it was the “best gift 

ever.” 

50. 

Respondent estimates he and JF had sex three to four times. The first 

time was in June 2017, at JF’s home while Trevor was at work. The other times it had 

been on campus, early in the morning, well before anyone was there. Respondent had 

15 

a 30-mile commute to San Gabriel and would routinely arrive early to avoid traffic. JF 

would also come to school early once or twice a week. 

51. 

Respondent estimates that the physical component of their relationship 

ended no later than September 2017. According to Respondent, he ended their 

physical relationship because he knew it wasn’t right and felt remorseful about it. No 

one knew of their relationship until after JF filed her lawsuit. 

52. 

Respondent denied the slapping incident JF described, staring at her 

breasts, or making comments about her breasts, but admitted to texting JF on her 

personal phone and that some of those texts were sexual in nature. According to 

Respondent, before their relationship became physical, JF would send him sexual texts 

and he would respond in kind. Respondent did not recall he received sexual texts from 

JF after the end of their physical relationship. Respondent also admitted visiting JF at 

her apartment but disputed JF’s description of the event and denied he had been 

inebriated. 

53. 

Respondent provided additional details regarding the text messages that 

had upset JF. According to Respondent, a colleague of his mentioned he had smelled 

alcohol on JF’s breath during a game she had been coaching. Respondent sent JF a 

strongly worded text to let her know that things like that could not happen and that 

he “had a small amount of influence on [her] tenure” and not to engage in behavior 

like that in the future. 

54. 

Principal Stone spoke to Respondent afterwards and made it clear the 

texts were inappropriate. Respondent apologized for his behavior.” According to 

Respondent, he had sent JF the texts only because he knew she was doing something 

that could get her fired and to let her know not to engage in similar behavior. 

16 

55.

Respondent was not surprised when JF was not offered tenure. There had 

been a number of incidents involving JF. She had problems getting along with 

students, administrators, other teachers, and basketball officials. JF did not accuse him 

of being the reason for not getting tenure and, in fact, asked him for a letter of 

support. 

56. 

The first time Respondent was informed of JF’s accusations was when he 

was notified of the lawsuit by the District. 

57. 

According to Respondent, other than JF, he had never had a physical 

relationship with a colleague. He remains embarrassed by his actions. Though he was 

not JF’s supervisor, Respondent acknowledged that by engaging in a physical 

relationship with JF, he transgressed appropriate boundaries. The relationship was “out 

of character” for him and he has since taken a boundaries class and has gone to 

therapy to deal with the insecurities that led him to have the affair. 

58. 

Respondent’s testimony was straightforward and direct and consistent 

with other evidence in the record, including the statement Respondent submitted to 

the Committee as part of its investigation into the misconduct allegations. 

Renewal Application

59.  On April 20, 2020, Respondent submitted an online application for a

Clear Single Subject Teaching Credential. In the application, Respondent properly 

disclosed his criminal conviction, the District termination, and Commission’s 

investigation. 

60. 

The application, however, was submitted in error. Respondent had 

intended on renewing his Credential and submitted the wrong application. 

17 

Character References

61.

At hearing, two of Respondent’s teaching colleagues, Timothy John 

Godley and Jeffrey Klein (both of whom are educators at different schools), testified on 

his behalf. They both spoke highly of Respondent, his abilities as an educator, and his 

good character. Mr. Klein’s testimony, however, was accorded less weight as Mr. Klein 

showed a tendency to exaggerate and refusal to consider any hypothetical questions 

during cross-examination. 

62.

Respondent also presented declarations from three other colleagues, 

Jeffrey Cammon, Haleigh Green (a student teacher), and Jared Hovesepian. Each of 

these declarants asserted the conduct alleged by JF was inconsistent with their 

experience with Respondent. Mr. Cammon and Mr. Hovesepian also wrote letters on 

Respondent’s behalf. They both spoke highly of Respondent’s character and teaching 

abilities in their letters and their declarations. These declarations were admitted as 

direct testimony pursuant to Government Code section 11514. 

63. 

In addition to these letters and the letters from Ms. Buchicchio and Ms. 

Fujimoto, Respondent presented 14 additional character reference letters from 

teaching colleagues from various schools and districts and his family members. The 

letter writers also speak highly of Respondent’s abilities as a teacher. Though the letter 

writers are aware of the allegations JF made against Respondent, the writers each 

speak highly of Respondent’s character and support his keeping his credentials.

18 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

Jurisdiction and Burden of Proof 

1.

Education Code section 44440, subdivision (b), authorizes the 

Commission to take adverse action against an individual’s teaching credential after the 

expiration of the credential.

2.

Education Code section 44421 authorizes the Commission to take 

adverse action against an individual’s teaching credentials for: (1) immoral or 

unprofessional conduct; (2) persistent defiance of and refusal to obey the laws 

regulating the duties of person serving in the public school system; (3) for any cause 

which would have warranted the denial of an application for a credential or renewal of 

a credential; or (4) for evident unfitness for service. Pursuant to Education Code 

section 44345, subdivision (e), the Commission may deny any application for the 

issuance or renewal of a credential made by any applicant who “[h]as committed any 

act involving moral turpitude.” 

3. 

“Aggravating factor” is defined by California Code of Regulations, title 5, 

section 80300, subdivision (b), as “an event or circumstance which demonstrates that a 

greater degree of adverse action for an act of professional misconduct is needed to 

adequately protect the public, schoolchildren or the profession.” Subdivisions (b)(3)-(5) 

further provide, in pertinent part, that aggravating factors may include, “misconduct

surrounded by or followed by bad faith, dishonesty or other violation of the laws 

governing educators,” misconduct which “significantly harmed the public or 

educational system,” and “demonstrated indifference toward the consequence of the 

misconduct, which includes failure to comply with known court orders.” 

19 

4.

The burden of proof for the First Amended Accusation in this case is on 

Complainant to establish cause for adverse action by clear and convincing evidence to 

a reasonable certainty. (

 (1985) 

164 Cal.App.3d 1035, 1039-1040.) Clear and convincing evidence has been defined as 

“[e]vidence of such convincing force that it demonstrates, in contrast to the opposing 

evidence, a high probability of the truth of the fact[s] for which it is offered as proof.” 

(

(1997) 52 Cal.App.4th 820, 847.)

5.

In the part of this proceeding based on the Statement of Issues, the 

standard of proof is different. In that circumstance Respondent does not have the 

same vested interest as he might in existing licensing rights. Therefore, he is not 

protected by the higher standard of proof, as he is in the First Amended 

Accusation. The applicable standard is by a preponderance of the evidence. 

(

167, 177; Evid. Code, § 115.) 

Analysis 

. (1950) 36 Cal.2d 

6. 

In 

(1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 224-5, the 

California Supreme Court held that adverse action may not be imposed against a 

teacher on the basis the teacher’s conduct is immoral, unprofessional or involves 

moral turpitude in the absence of evidence showing the teacher is unfit to teach. 

7. 

For purposes of disciplining a teaching credential, the factors discussed 

in 

have been codified at California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80302 

and include: (1) the likelihood that the conduct adversely affected students or fellow 

teachers and the degree of such adversity; (2) the proximity or remoteness in time of 

the conduct; (3) the type of teaching certificate held by the teacher; (4) the existence 

20 

of extenuating or aggravating circumstances and publicity, if any, surrounding the 

conduct; (5) the praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the 

conduct; (6) the likelihood of recurrence of the questioned conduct; (7) the extent that 

the discipline may adversely impact or have a chilling effect on the constitutional 

rights of the teacher; and (8) the publicity or notoriety given to the conduct. 

SEXUAL HARASSMENT AND DISCRIMINATION ALLEGATIONS

8. 

In the present case, Complainant failed to establish by clear and 

convincing evidence Respondent sexually harassed or discriminated against JF. The 

only evidence in support of those claims was JF’s testimony. JF was not a credible 

witness and her testimony was not given much weight for the reasons set below.

9. 

Initially, JF claimed Respondent showed her an excessive level of 

attention and was constantly seeking of her company. This was not corroborated by 

for the other two members in the department, Ms. Buchicchio and Ms. Fujimoto.

Though Respondent conceded he showed more attention to JF than the other 

teachers in the department, the level of attention was not excessive in light of the fact 

respondent, as department chair, was responsible for training new department 

members.  Ms. Buchicchio and Ms. Fujimoto were highly experienced teachers who 

had been at Saint Gabriel of a number of years.

10. 

JF also claimed she had been too scared to report Respondent’s behavior 

as it would have been his word against hers. JF repeatedly stressed throughout her 

testimony that part of Respondent’s harassing and discriminatory behavior was the 

excessive number of inappropriate texts and emails he would send her. None of those 

emails or texts were submitted into evidence. It was also established JF had previously 

complained to Principal Stone when Respondent sent her texts she felt were 

21 

inappropriate and provided Principal Stone with a print out of the those texts. There 

was no indication JF had any concerns of retaliation at that time. 

11. 

Finally, JF’s testimony regarding the Special Olympics raises particular 

concerns. What was particularly telling was her insistence she had not lied when, in 

order to avoid volunteering, she sent the text to Ms. Fujimoto telling her that her 

boyfriend had been shot. 

12. 

The evidence did establish Respondent and JF had a physical relationship 

that lasted for approximately three months and had sexual intercourse on the school 

premises. Respondent, though he was the department chair, had no supervisory role 

over JF. JF did not testify she believed Respondent to be her supervisor or that he had 

the authority to offer or deny her tenure. (In fact, the evidence reflected that 

Respondent, in the texts that were shown to Principal Stone, revealed that the extent 

of his authority in making tenure decisions was solely related to his ability to provide 

Principal Stone with information on JF’s performance as a teacher.) There was no 

evidence Respondent had coerced JF into having sexual intercourse by either 

promising her tenure or threatening her continued employment. There was no 

evidence anyone was aware of their physical relationship and therefore their conduct 

did not adversely affect any students or their fellow teachers, and no evidence that 

similar conduct is likely to reoccur. 

CRIMINAL CONVICTION

13. 

In the present case, Complainant established by clear and convincing 

evidence Respondent had been convicted of one misdemeanor count of violating 

Vehicle Code section 23142, subdivision (a), driving under the influence. 

22 

14.

The California Supreme Court has held that the offense proscribed by 

Vehicle Code section 23152, subdivision (a) does not on its face involve moral 

turpitude. (

(1990) 52 Cal.3d 487; see also 

(1983) 

149 Cal. App.3d 668.) Thus, if moral turpitude is to exist in this case, it must be based 

on the circumstances surrounding the offense. 

15.  No evidence was presented to establish that the facts and circumstances 

surrounding the commission of this offense involved moral turpitude. Further, there 

was no evidence the conduct adversely affected students or fellow teachers and the 

degree of such adversity; it occurred more than 25 years ago and is unlikely to reoccur.

Cause for Discipline and Denial 

16. 

Cause was not established for adverse action against Respondent’s 

credential pursuant to Education Code section 44421, for unprofessional conduct, 

based on Complainant’s failure to provide clear and convincing evidence.

17.

Cause was not established for adverse action against Respondent’s 

credential pursuant to Education Code section 44421, for immoral conduct, based on 

Complainant’s failure to provide clear and convincing evidence Respondent committed 

acts of unprofessional conduct.

18.

Cause was not established for adverse action against Respondent’s 

credential pursuant to Education Code section 44421, and 44345, subdivision (e), 

based on Complainant’s failure to provide clear and convincing evidence Respondent 

committed acts of moral turpitude. Cause was not established to deny Respondent’s 

application for a Certificate of Clearance pursuant to Education Code 44345, 

subdivision (e), in that Respondent established by a preponderance of the evidence he 

had not committed acts of moral turpitude. The evidence did however establish 

23 

Respondent presently holds a Clear Single Teaching Credential, and the application 

was submitted in error. 

ORDER 

The First Amended Accusation and Statement of Issues against Respondent Jon 

Patrick Keller are dismissed.

DATE:

NANA CHIN

Administrative Law Judge

Office of Administrative Hearings

24 

