BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Accusation Against: 

CYNTHIA STROFFOLINO, Respondent 

Case No. 2-108447055 

OAH No. 2021100866 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Adam L. Berg, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, 

State of California, heard this matter by telephone/videoconference on March 14 and 

15, 2022. 

Shannon M. Brubaker, Deputy Attorney General, Department of Justice, State of 

California, represented complainant, Mary Vixie Sandy, Ed.D., Executive Director, 

California Commission on Teacher Credentialing (CTC). 

Cynthia Stroffolino, respondent, represented herself. 

The matter was submitted for decision on March 15, 2022. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Background 

1. 

The CTC is responsible for the credentialing of public school teachers, 

including issuing credentials and taking adverse action1 against applicants and 

credential holders. The CTC

 is responsible for 

investigating alleged acts or omissions that may be cause for the CTC to take adverse 

action. 

2. 

On June 9, 2003, the CTC issued a certificate of clearance that expired2 on 

June 1, 2008. On December 19, 2006, the CTC issued an Emergency 30-Day Substitute 

Teaching Permit that was regularly renewed until it expired on April 1, 2017. On March 

8, 2007, the CTC issued a Preliminary Five Year Multiple Subject Teaching Credential, 

which expired on April 1, 2012. On July 18, 2016, the CTC issued a Preliminary One 

Year Multiple Subject Teaching Credential, which expired on August 1, 2018. On 

August 1, 2018, the CTC issued respondent a Clear Multiple Subject Teaching 

Credential that will expire on September 1, 2023, unless renewed. There is no history 

of any discipline imposed against the abov

1 

private admonition, or public reproval of a credential holder, or the suspension or 

revocation of a credential. (Ed. Code, § 44000.5.) 

2 The expiration of any credential does not deprive the CTC from taking 

disciplinary action against the credential. (Ed. Code, § 44440, subd. (a).) 

2 

 
 
3.

At its January 20 through 22, 2021, meeting, the Committee found 

probable cause to recommend 

s. The findings 

elementary school teacher by the San Jacinto Unified School District (district) during 

the 2018-2019 school year. Respondent timely requested an administrative hearing. 

hile employed as an 

4. 

On July 15, 2021, complainant signed the accusation alleging the 

following as grounds for discipline: unprofessional conduct, immoral conduct, evident 

unfitness for service, and acts of moral turpitude. The factual allegations relate to her 

conduct involving fellow teachers while she was a fourth-grade teacher at Park Hill 

Elementary School (Park Hill Elementary). Complainant seeks the revocation of 

s. 

5. 

Respondent timely filed a Notice of Defense. This hearing ensued. 

Allegations Related to the 2018-2019 School Year at Park Hill 

Elementary 

TESTIMONY OF SUSAN RECORD 

6. 

Susan Record has been an elementary school teacher for the past 26 

years, with the last 17 years at Park Hill Elementary. During the 2018-2019 school year, 

she taught third grade. Ms. Record and respondent were friends during the three years 

they worked together at Park Hill Elementary. Although Ms. Record considered 

respondent a friend, they did not socialize outside of school. 

7. 

Over the course of the school year, on approximately five occasions, 

respondent showed Ms. Record pictures 

 naked penis that 

were on 

 phone. 

3 

classroom when children were absent. Twice this occurred while walking through the 

hallway; although children were present, they could not see what was on her phone. 

Ms. Record did not object to respondent showing her these images. Her reaction was, 

OK, you know. Let me see this type of thing because we are friends

Ms. Record thought that this was inappropriate to do on an elementary 

Ms. Record never shared 

similar types of photos with respondent. 

8. 

In October 2018, respondent shared with Ms. Record that she was 

bisexual, 

, and shared details about her time there. This 

occurred in 

classroom. While there were no children there, the door was 

open. Ms. Record did not object to this conversation, and Ms. Record

conversation occurred a few times. Respondent would always talk about her 

This type of 

initiating this conversation or asking respondent about her sex life. On one occasion, 

Ms. Record denied 

9. 

In October 2018, 

school and told her that 

 and stated to Ms. 

statement surprised Ms. Record because 

She asked her 

by the statement. Ms. Record declined and felt respondent was making a sexual 

advance. 

10.  On another occasion near Halloween, respondent wanted to take a 

with Ms. Record. As they were about to take the photo, respondent kissed Ms. 

4 

 
 
Record on the cheek. Several days later, respondent asked Ms. Record if she liked the 

kiss. Ms. Record did not think the kiss was a big deal, but when respondent asked 

about it, Ms. Record felt the context changed, not necessarily in a sexual way

11. 

during breaks and say that she loved Ms. Record. This did not initially bother Ms. 

Record because 

One day respondent saw her and 

asked Ms. Record if she was avoiding her and whether she still loved respondent. Then 

s statement, Ms. Record felt the statements were 

Ms. Record felt respondent was serious when she said, 

Record said the statement did not make her feel uncomfortable, but she knew the 

to respond directly to the statement, which is why she said she would not raise more 

did not really know how 

kids. 

12.  Ms. Record began to avoid respondent and walk a different way so as 

not to encounter her. She did this because she knew how respondent felt about her 

respondent talked about all the time, asking Ms. Record to join, which made Ms. 

Record uncomfortable. 

, which 

13. 

Approximately six times over the course of the year, respondent would 

door open, although no children were present. 

5 

 
 
14.

In April 2019, Ms. Record was in her classroom after school and had been 

crying about a personal issue. Respondent hugged Ms. Record, then looked her up 

. I watched you walk away and 

you looked good from behind, no wonder your students pay attention to 

This 

upset Ms. Record because it was as if respondent had not been paying attention to 

why Ms. Record was upset and was only interested in her romantically. This changed 

the relationship and prompted Ms. Record to send respondent a text message asking 

Ms. Record tried to communicate that she was ending the friendship. 

15. 

Shortly after sending the text to respondent, Ms. Record was placed on 

administrative leave by the district. Her principal told Ms. Record that respondent had 

reported her for something, but the principal could not tell her about what specifically. 

Ms. Record believed respondent was retaliating against her and had sexually harassed 

her, so on May 15, 2019, Ms. Record submitted a letter outlining the above 

interactions to the district and requested a transfer to another school. Ms. Record 

wrote this letter because she did not feel the district was taking the situation seriously. 

Ms. Record was put on leave for 19 days before she was allowed to return to school. 

16.  On cross-examination, respondent asked Ms. Record if she ever made 

prior claims of sexual harassment. Ms. Record said she attended a conference and a 

counselor there made gestures and comments that made Ms. Record uncomfortable, 

so she reported it to the district. She denied ever alleging sexual harassment against 

anyone else. Ms. Record also maintained that she did not socialize with respondent 

outside of school, although there was one occasion where she and her husband 

stopped by a bar where a coworker was performing, and respondent was also there. 

6 

 
17. Ms. Record confirmed that respondent had a good reputation as a 

teacher and her students liked her. 

TESTIMONY OF KAREN KNOX 

18. 

During the 2018-2019 school year, Karen Knox taught fourth grade at 

Park Hill Elementary. This was her first year working for the district and as a teacher. 

Respondent was the fourth-grade team leader, so Ms. Knox had daily interaction with 

her. They worked collaboratively on curriculum and attended weekly team meetings 

together. The two did not socialize outside of school, although they might have eaten 

lunch together on occasion outside of campus. 

19.  On one occasion, Ms. Knox 

statement about how nobody ever brings in leftover snacks into the lounge, and 

Ms. Knox took this to be a reference 

to oral sex, since respondent had previously told her that she liked both men and 

women. Ms. Knox took the statement as a joke and it did not bother Ms. Knox much 

because she and respondent were both going through divorces at the time, but 

respondent knew Ms. Knox was straight and monogamous, so it would not be 

something that interested her. 

20. 

Another time in the lounge for a meeting, Ms. Knox asked respondent if 

a seat was taken, to which respondent responded, 

, 

Ms. Knox said she was shocked by the statement, but she 

just sat down and continued with what she was doing. 

21. 

At grade level meetings, while people were gathering before the start of 

the meeting, respondent frequently stated

This occurred approximately 

five or six times over the course of the year. Other teachers, but no students, were 

7 

present.

now? Or are we going to do our work

a ho and Miller is a ho

Mr. Miller was 

another fourth-grade teacher at the school. Ms. Knox said that these comments often 

came out of nowhere, so she could not provide any context for the statement. 

22.  Ms. Knox did discuss her own online dating with respondent. She 

thought the comments respondent made would be suitable for lunchtime but 

not  during a meeting, because respondent was also her team leader and 

Mr. Miller was her assigned mentor. 

23.  Ms. Knox had issues with the school administration that year, and 

ultimately, she was not elected to return. These issues related mainly to scheduling of 

team and planning meetings outside of contract hours, and her custody schedule was 

not accommodated. Ms. Knox felt that 

statements made for an uncomfortable work environment. Ms. Knox never said 

anything to respondent or the administration because the administration made it 

known that their team was 

and they needed to make 

it look like they all got along. 

24.  Ms. Knox documented the above in an email she sent to Dr. Sharon 

Raffiee

request. Ms. Knox also confirmed that she met with Margarita Lanier, Park Hill 

documented the meeting in a note, which stated that Ms. Knox reported that 

respondent made inappropriate comments, hitting on her, and making statements 

eptember 24, 2018. Ms. Lanier 

respondent was even a teacher with the way she behaved, but Ms. Knox did not want 

know 

8 

 
to write a statement because she feared retaliation. Ms. Knox testified that she did not 

report any of these comments to Ms. Lanier, but other teachers who were present in 

the lounge reported it. Ms. Knox believed Ms. Lanier did not like her, and she was just 

trying to get through the year. Ms. Knox wanted to  keep her head down  so she did 

not want to make a formal statement. 

25. 

As a first-year teacher, Ms. Knox needed help with curriculum and 

ng and made it 

more difficult to do her job. However, Ms. Knox did not avoid respondent and still 

sought her out for assistance. 

TESTIMONY OF KATE DEMBOWSKI 

26. 

Kate Dembowski taught fourth grade at Park Hill Elementary for two 

years through the 2018-2019 school year. She and respondent were friends at school 

and socialized some outside of school. Ms. Dembowski was not surprised when she 

statements respondent made at the fourth-grade team meetings, and respondent was 

 Both respondent and another teacher, Mr. Miller, talked about 

their dating life and made sexually suggestive comments. This conversation did not 

make Ms. Dembowski uncomfortable or cause her offense, but it was not a topic 

appropriate for work. Ms. Demb

once at a team meeting. Again, Ms. Dembowski was not personally offended, but if her 

mother had been there she would have been shocked, so Ms. Dembowski could see 

why others might be offended. No children were present during these conversations. 

Respondent was always very professional with the students. 

9 

27. Ms. Dembowski testified that Ms. Record openly bragged that she could 

get anyone at the school fired because her husband worked for the district. She also 

testified that Ms. Record filed a sexual harassment claim against another teacher at the 

TESTIMONY OF JACINTA COATS 

. 

28. 

Jacinta Coats has taught at Park Hill Elementary for six or seven years. 

During the 2018-2019 school year, she was a resource (special education) teacher. She 

knew respondent, but the two did not socialize and they only interacted on occasion. 

In the fall of 2018, two other teachers asked Ms. Coats for advice because they were 

concerned about 

lounge. Ms. Coats told them they should report it to the principal because Ms. Knox 

was new teacher, and if she felt she was being harassed, only administration could do 

something about it. Ms. Coats had been present in the lounge when respondent made 

the comment to Ms. Knox after Ms. Knox commented there should be snacks in the 

lounge. Ms. Coats understood it to be a sexual comment. Ms. Coats did not believe 

Ms. Knox was happy about the comment based on the reaction on her face. 

Respondent had made similar statements at other times and told Ms. Coats that she 

was bisexual. Respondent had a reputation of talking about sexual things, so it was not 

out of the ordinary. On three or four occasions, respondent asked Ms. Coats if she 

based on some of the other statements respondent made. As a result, Ms. Coats tried 

This made Ms. Coats uncomfortable 

to distance herself from respondent. 

10 

TESTIMONY OF HOLLY AMIGHETTI 

29.  Holly Amighetti3 is in her sixth year teaching at Park Hill Elementary. 

During the 2018-2019 school year, she taught second grade. She met respondent at a 

new teachers orientation as they were both hired at the same time. The two became 

friends and they socialized outside of school, including working out together at the 

same gym before school. However, the friendship changed when Ms. Amighetti began 

feeling uncomfortable around respondent. Respondent began talking about things 

that made Ms. Amighetti uncomfortable. Specifically, respondent alluded to things 

that suggested to Ms. Amighetti that respondent was more interested in a romantic 

relationship than just a friendship. For example, respondent would say that she was 

she was into women sexually. She would say 

things in a joking way, 

3 Shortly before taking a lunch break on the first day of hearing, respondent 

advised that she was of the belief that the hearing would end at 12:00 p.m. on each of 

the scheduled hearing days. Respondent said she received an email from Deputy 

Attorney General Brubaker stating such, an assertion that Ms. Brubaker denied, and 

which respondent did not produce any corroboration. Respondent said she was unable 

to attend the hearing in the afternoon because she had to work. Because complainant 

had scheduled most of her remaining witnesses to appear on the afternoon of March 

absence), respondent was told that the hearing would proceed as scheduled, and 

attendance at the hearing was her choice. Accordingly, respondent was not present for 

who testified the following day. 

11 

 
respondent outside of work. 

As a result. Ms. Amighetti stopped socializing with 

30.  Ms. Amighetti was not surprised when she was interviewed by the district 

about respondent because of the inappropriate comments respondent had made. On 

several occasions, respondent discussed with Ms. Amighetti about going to swingers  

clubs. On more than 10 occasions, while at school, respondent would make a comment 

On one occasion, Ms. Amighetti made a comment about being 

hungry and respondent said something to the effect of, 

Amighetti understood to be sexual in nature. Ms. Knox also shared with Ms. Amighetti 

that respondent made a similar comment to her and other inappropriate statements 

during team meetings. Ms. Knox was very concerned because she felt like she was 

going to lose her teaching position. Ms. Amighetti ended up reporting this to the 

principal, Ms. Lanier, because she was concerned about Ms. Knox and did not feel that 

as a new teacher, she was receiving the support she needed. 

31.  On one occ

library after school. Respondent had passed around a photo 

appropriate for the setting. After these incidents, Ms. Amighetti attempted to avoid 

respondent and did not want to have anything to do with her. 

behavior affected the work environment and caused her to be worried that she might 

run into respondent while at school. 

TESTIMONY OF MARCIA THOMAS 

32.  Marcia Thomas has taught for the district for 24 years, the last 14 of 

which at Park Hill Elementary. During the 2018-2019 school year, she was a second-

12 

grade teacher. She was friendly with respondent and would occasionally socialize 

outside of school in a group, such as at a Christmas party or after-work happy hours. 

Ms. Thomas was interviewed by Dr. Raffiee regarding respondent. Ms. Thomas clarified 

that the statement written by Dr. Raffiee was inaccurate in one respect, as she never 

personally heard respondent say, 

told her and Ms. 

Amighetti this. 

could not recall if she heard this more than once. Ms. Thomas was not surprised that 

the district was investigating respondent because she did not believe respondent to be 

very professional. 

TESTIMONY OF LESLIE SEARL 

33. 

Leslie Searl has been a teacher at Park Hill Elementary for the past 20 

years. On one occasion, respondent and Ms. Record were walking and talking together 

in the hallway at the end of recess. Because they were laughing and joking, Ms. Searl 

whole 

O

her a picture of a naked man in the 

shower with the curtain pulled aside. Although Ms. Searl felt it was inappropriate, she 

did not say anything and was not offended. Although students were around in the 

hallway, the phone was not visible to students

In the past, respondent had told Ms. Searl that she went to swingers  clubs, but Ms. 

Searl shut the conversation down. Ms. Searl was also the union representative, and Ms. 

Knox had told her about several comments respondent made that were offensive. 

13 

TESTIMONY OF CARMEN NUNEZ-TAIT 

34. 

Carmen Nunez-Tait has been a teacher for the past 16 years and at Park 

Hill Elementary for the past six years. She and respondent were friendly at school but 

did not socialize outside of school. 

-

lunch or in passing on the campus when students were around. She would make 

comments or gestures about sexual activities. 

-

and about sexual experiences, and respondent asked other teachers if they did 

One time, in a classroom during lunch, she shared that she had same-sex 

encounters and made 

noises. This made Ms. Nunez-Tait extremely uncomfortable to the point that she 

would leave the room if respondent entered. Respondent never showed her naked 

photos, but she was present when respondent shared what she assumed to be naked 

photos, based on the reaction by the other teachers. 

TESTIMONY OF MARGARITA LANIER 

35.  Margarita Lanier has been employed by the district for the past seven 

years and is currently a middle school principal. During the 2018-2019 school year, she 

was principal of Park Hill Elementary. Ms. Lanier first met respondent when she was 

dean of students at a middle school where respondent was a substitute teacher. Ms. 

Lanier

stiletto heels, which Ms. 

Lanier believed posed a safety hazard. She asked respondent to stop wearing them, 

but respondent ignored the request. Later, Ms. Lanier began hearing conversations 

about respondent making inappropriate comments. Ms. Lanier documented having a 

14 

conversation on September 24, 2018,4 where she met with Ms. Knox and a union 

representative during which Ms. Knox reported that respondent made inappropriate 

comments to her and during the team meetings. However, Ms. Knox did not want to 

write a statement because she believed respondent would retaliate. After this meeting, 

Ms. Lanier reported the incident to personnel and then met with respondent and 

asked her to step down from the lead teacher position. 

TESTIMONY OF SHARON RAFFIEE 

36. 

Sharon Raffiee is the Executive Director of Personnel for the district, who 

has been employed there for the past 17 years. On May 16, 2019, Ms. Lanier provided 

her Ms. Record

 against respondent. Dr. Raffiee went to Park Hill 

Elementary and met with respondent, 

representative. Dr. Raffiee read 

respondent the opportunity to respond. Respondent only stated that it was probably 

not a good idea to make a comment about swingers  bars in her room after school. Dr. 

Raffiee encouraged respondent to provide her a narrative statement by email. Dr. 

Raffiee placed respondent on paid administrative leave while she further investigated 

the allegations. 

4 The document was not dated, and it appears that the reference to September 

is in error, and this meeting took place in November 2018. Moreover, because this 

documentation was first referenced in a June 24, 2019, email from Ms. Lanier to Dr. 

Raffiee, it does not appear that Ms. Lanier documented this meeting 

contemporaneously. 

15 

 
37.

Dr. Raffiee interviewed Ms. Record about her statement, which was 

On May 21, 2019, Dr. Raffiee received an email 

from respondent with two written statements attached, summarized as follows: 

statement respondent submitted against Ms. Record. At no time did respondent make 

an advance on Ms. Record, and respondent believed that Ms. Record twisted many 

private conversations. She admitted to having personal conversations with Ms. Record 

about intimate parts of their lives, which Ms. Record would often initiate. At no point 

did Ms. Record tell respondent she did not want respondent to share with her. Instead, 

Ms. Record constantly referred to respondent as a friend and somebody with whom 

she could share things. 

Respondent indicated she believed the complaint stemmed from a complaint 

. Respondent 

then discussed facts relating to her complaint about Ms. Record. 

Respondent admitted to showing photos to Ms. Record of 

privates, but this was at the request of Ms. Record. Respondent explained that the two 

frequently talked about sex, and Ms. Record asked to see the explicit photos. On 

another occasion, after Ms. Record had asked to see the photo, Ms. Record called for 

Ms. Searl to look at the photo as well. This made respondent uncomfortable because 

respondent did not have this type of relationship with Ms. Searl or had not previously 

had similar conversations. However, Ms. Record prompted her to show Ms. Searl the 

picture, who just laughed as a result. 

occasion, she was irritated after work. Ms. Record then made the comment, 

 on one 

e occasion, Ms. Nunez-

16 

Tait and another teacher walked in while the two were laughing. They asked what was 

going on, and Ms. Record explained why they were laughing and stated

need dick tonigh

went their separate ways. 

 all laughed and 

Regarding the allegations that she looked Ms. Record up and down and told 

her she looked good from behind, respondent said the two did pay each other 

compliments about their attire, but she did not say those words. Instead, Ms. Record 

told respondent other coworkers paid her compliments, especially from men, and she 

Respondent said she could not account for the allegations about the swingers  

club and denied that they were ever said. 

In a second statement, respondent extensively discussed her allegations of 

misconduct against Ms. Record. 

38.  On May 28, 2018, Dr. Raffiee met with respondent with her union 

representative. She informed respondent that the allegations had been substantiated 

to the extent that the district believed she needed to be removed from the classroom 

and respondent had not offered a clear response. Dr. Raffiee informed respondent that 

she would be taking her concerns to the cabinet and dismissal charges would be 

forthcoming and offered her the choice of resignation. After speaking with her union 

representative, respondent requested additional time, and it was agreed that a 

meeting would be convened the following day. At the next meeting, respondent told 

Dr. Raffiee that she never said any of the things in the allegations. Dr. Raffiee offered 

to return to Park Hill and interview additional teachers, which was agreed. Dr. Raffiee 

testified she did this because she thought it only fair, as respondent had alleged that 

17 

 
complaint about Ms. Record. 

39. 

Dr. Raffiee interviewed additional teachers at Park Hill, many of whom 

testified at this hearing and whose statements were consistent with their testimony. As 

indicated in their testimony, many of the teacher expressed no surprise about the 

nature of the investigation and there was an overall validation of the complaint about 

unprofessional workplace conduct. 

40.  On June 7, 2019, respondent met with respondent and her union 

representative. Dr. Raffiee shared the results of her interviews, including additional 

allegations. Dr. Raffiee informed respondent that based on her unprofessional 

conduct, she would be recommending dismissal, but she would be given an 

opportunity to resign. Respondent asked about receiving additional training or 

whether she could be moved to another site, which Dr. Raffiee declined. Dr. Raffiee 

testified that respondent received yearly trainings on sexual harassment, anti-bullying, 

and discrimination. The types of conduct committed by respondent were covered in 

these trainings. 

41.  On January 21, 2020, respondent agreed to resign from the district 

following the district having initiated dismissal proceedings. 

42. 

: Ms. Record and Dr. 

Raffiee have been friends for the past 17 years. Dr. Raffiee allowed for a toxic work 

environment caused by Ms. Record. Respondent was told to do as Ms. Record says, 

and that if respondent ever came forward, Ms. Record would have her fired as she had 

done with other employees. Finally, respondent filed a complaint against Ms. Record in 

18 

 
May 2019 after seeing Ms. Record become physical with another employee.

and her livelihood has been taken. However, she has taken classes, gone through 

counseling, and taken workplace violence training, which have helped her set 

boundaries so that she will not be  entrapped  any more. 

43. 

Respondent has worked in education for the past 20 years and has held a 

teaching credential since 2006. She has never been disciplined until this incident. Since 

the incident, respondent has attended individual counseling, and domestic violence 

counseling through county social services and Kaiser. It was not clear from 

. It was also unclear 

what kind of therapy, if any, she continues to receive, as she could not name a 

therapist 

-

She said that obtaining 

services through Kaiser has been difficult since they do not maintain a sufficient 

number of therapists. She also goes to a weekly support group for mothers at her 

church. The domestic violence course lasted nine weeks, which she attended 

voluntarily 

suffered from domestic violence. Respondent still feels that she is being targeted 

because she went after Ms. Record. When asked if that is why this hearing is occurring, 

When it was noted that there were 

friends. She said they do not remember how conversations started and only remember 

what respondent said. Respondent said they are all 

from Ms. Record. 

44. 

Respondent completed school to become a medical scribe, where she 

learned about workplace boundaries. She has not worked in education since, because 

19 

 
respondent has not worked until starting a couple weeks before for Riverside County 

training to be a 

 peer counselor. 

45.  When asked if she acknowledged any of the misconduct alleged in the 

accusation, respondent said she did some wrong, but it was orchestrated by Ms. 

Record and only when respondent spoke against her was her conduct brought to 

Ms. Record entrapped her. Ms. 

Record said she could get anyone fired, and she did. Respondent said she 

conducted herself

  everyone  

Respondent 

testified that she only said this once, which as she explained in her statement to Dr. 

Raffiee, was when she repeated that Ms. Record said,  [respondent] 

This 

. Respondent then volunteered, 

. They all want to be staying within the district, they 

are al

46. 

Regarding showing the naked photos of men, respondent said it did not 

happen as the witnesses described. Respondent said she only showed a nude photo 

after Ms. Record asked her about her dating life, respondent replied she had a new 

man, Ms. Record asked her 

her the photo. Later, at the end of the school day, Ms. Record called out to Ms. Searl 

me see.  After respondent showed her the photo, Ms. Searl laughed and said she had 

a boyfriend just like that. Everyone was laughing and while she recognized it was on 

school campus, respondent said she did not understand why this is happening 

20 

 
 
believes she is only in these proceedings because of Ms. Record. 

Respondent 

47.  When asked if she showed a nude photo during a baby shower, 

respondent said Ms. Amighetti took her phone and passed it. She explained that she 

received a text, after which she giggled. After seeing the photo - which was a sweat-

mark in the shape of a penis and not a naked man 

 her phone was passed around the 

room. 

48. 

said she could not recall saying that. Respondent denied being told anything about 

the comment to Ms. Knox by Ms. Lanier. She denied being removed from the team 

lead, and she only stepped down from the position shortly before going on a medical 

leave. 

49. 

but they 

all discussed their love lives and they all shared personal information. 

50.  When asked if she learned anything out of this experience, respondent 

se she was a whistleblower against Ms. Record. She is sad 

that she placed herself in this predicament. Respondent said she will not speak so 

freely in the future, she will be more tactful with how she comes across. 

51. 

In conclusion, respondent stated she worked hard to obtain her 

credential and would like to continue serving the community. She has taken courses 

and classes, and she wishes to continue to serve the community. She also noted that 

she was the only woman of color at Park Hill Elementary, and she believes there was 

prejudice against her. 

21 

 
52.

Respondent did not submit any evidence or call any witnesses.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

Burden and Standard of Proof 

1. 

Complainant bears the burden of proof of establishing that the charges 

in the accusation are true. (Evid. Code § 115.) The standard of proof in an 

administrative disciplinary action seeking the suspension or revocation of a 

professional license is clear and convincing evidence. (

Clear and convincing evidence requires a 

finding of high probability, or evidence so clear as to leave no substantial doubt; it 

requires sufficiently strong evidence to command the unhesitating assent of every 

reasonable mind. (

 (2005) 130 Cal.App.4th 586, 594.) 

Relevant Statutes 

2. 

Education Code section 44421 permits the CTC to take adverse action 

immoral or unprofessional conduct or  for any cause that 

would have warranted the denial of an application for a credential or the renewal 

thereof, or for evident unfitness for service.  

3. 

Education Code section 44345 lists as grounds to deny any application 

for the issuance of a credential an applicant who  has committed any act involving 

moral turpitude.  (

at subd. (e).) Any denial on the grounds of moral turpitude must 

other duties for which that applicant is certificated, or competence to perform the 

duties which the credential would authorize the applicant to perform.  

22 

 
Evaluation 

4. 

Clear and convincing evidence established that respondent made 

inappropriate and unprofessional comments to her coworkers while on school 

property or during school hours during the 2018-2019 school year. These included 

sexually suggestive comments and coarse language during team meetings or during 

lunch. 

due to a potential moti

against Ms. Record, the testimony of the other witnesses was more credible than 

 testimony. Respondent essentially denied most of the allegations and 

alleged that the witnesses were lying because they were afraid of, or friends with, Ms. 

Record. This allegation is rejected. Indeed, two of the witnesses are no longer 

employed by the district and as respondent no longer works there, there is no motive 

for any of the witnesses to lie at this hearing. All of the witnesses were consistent in 

in identifying specific instances where her behavior was inappropriate. Even if the 

independent grounds to conclude respondent engaged in unprofessional conduct. 

Specifically, respondent made sexual references on multiple occasions, showed nude 

photographs on her phone, and 

RELATIONSHIP TO FITNESS TO TEACH 

5. 

Any adverse action on the grounds that respondent committed an act of 

moral turpitude must be base

teach. (Ed. Code, § 44345.) The statutory definition of immoral conduct  must be 

considered in conjunction with the unique position of public school teachers, upon 

limitations on freedom of action which do not 

23 

 
exis

omitted].) 

6. 

In 

(

)

(2011) 194 Cal.App.4th 1454, 1466) (

) [citation 

 (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 235 

teaching profession only upon a showing that his retention in the profession poses a 

significant danger of harm to either students, school employees, or others who might 

be affected by his actions as a teacher The court delineated the following criteria to 

the likelihood that the conduct may have adversely affected students or fellow 

teachers; (2) the degree of such adversity anticipated; (3) the proximity or remoteness 

in time of the conduct; (4) the type of teaching certificate held by the teacher; (5) the 

extenuating or aggravating circumstances, if any, surrounding the conduct in question; 

(6) the praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the conduct; 

(7) the likelihood of the recurrence of the conduct in question; and (8) the extent to 

which disciplinary action may inflict an adverse impact or have a chilling effect upon 

the constitutional rights of the teacher involved or other teachers. (

. at pp. 229-230.) 

ist the board in determining . . . 

the teacher's fitness to teach, i.e., in determining whether the teacher's future 

classroom performance and overall impact on his students are likely to meet the 

).) 

(1982) 135 Cal.App.3d 278, 288 (

24 

Not all the 

factors must be considered, only the most pertinent ones. 

(

 (1993) 16 Cal.App.4th 

1766, 1777.) Additionally, the 

 factors may be applied to all the charges in the 

aggregate. (

(1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429,1456-1457 (

).) The determination of 

fitness for service required by 

 is a factual one. (

at fn. 3); 

 (1988) 45 Cal.3d. 208, 220-221 (

); 

(1994) 28 Cal.App.4th 369, 384.) 

7. 

In considering the 

 factors relevant to this case in relation to the 

sustained allegations the following conclusions are reached. 

The Likelihood That the Conduct May Have Adversely Affected 

Students, Fellow Teachers, or the Educational Community, and the 

Degree of Such Adversity Anticipated 

8. 

 her fellow teachers, many 

of whom sought to avoid her or felt uncomfortable in her presence. 

The Proximity or Remoteness in Time of Conduct 

9. 

The events that occurred were not recent. However, the conduct is not so 

remote as to prevent the CTC from taking action. (

, 

, at p. 477 [conduct 

was not remote in time where the CTC took action against the credential three years 

after the criminal conduct occurred].) 

25 

Type of Teaching Credential 

10. 

This factor looks to the teacher's teaching certificate and whether the 

teacher's conduct is consistent with her credential. (

, at p. 1143.) 

Respondent

education. 

nimical to a credential for elementary or secondary 

Extenuating or Aggravating Circumstances 

11. 

California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80300, subdivisions (b) and 

(m), provide definitions for aggravating and mitigating factors which demonstrates 

that a greater or more lenient degree of adverse action for an act of professional 

misconduct is needed to adequately protect the public, schoolchildren or the 

profession. These factors are instructive, but not exhaustive, in evaluating extenuating 

or aggravating circumstances related to fitness to teach. 

Aggravating factors include: 

(1) a prior record of adverse action including the nature and 

extent of that record; 

(2) that the misconduct evidences multiple acts of 

wrongdoing or demonstrate a pattern of misconduct; 

(3) that the misconduct was surrounded by or followed by 

bad faith, dishonesty or other violation of the laws 

governing educators; 

26 

(4) that the misconduct significantly harmed a child 

entrusted to the care of a credential holder or applicant, 

significantly harmed the public or the educational system; 

(5) that the holder or applicant demonstrated indifference 

toward the consequence of the misconduct, which includes 

failure to comply with known court orders; or 

(6) that the holder or applicant had prior notice, warnings 

or reprimands for similar conduct from any reliable source. 

(

at subd. (b).) 

Mitigating factors include: 

(1) absence of any prior record of adverse action over many 

years of educational service, coupled with present 

misconduct which is not deemed most serious; 

(2) lack of harm to the person who is the object of the 

misconduct; 

(3) emotional or physical difficulties suffered by the holder 

or applicant which substantially contributed to the 

misconduct; provided that the difficulties were not the 

product of illegal conduct by the credential holder or 

applicant, such as illegal drug or substance abuse; and 

further provided that the credential holder or applicant has 

established through clear and convincing evidence that he 

or she no longer has such difficulties; 

27 

(4) a demonstration of good character of the applicant or 

holder attested to by references from the educational 

community or the general community from individuals 

aware of the extent of the applicant's or holder's 

misconduct; 

(5) objective action taken by the applicant or holder, 

spontaneously demonstrating remorse at the time of the 

misconduct, and recognition of the wrongdoing which is 

designed to timely make amends for the consequences of 

the misconduct; 

(6) the proximity or remoteness in time relative to the 

seriousness of the misconduct; or 

(7) the nature and extent of subsequent rehabilitation. 

12. 

There are aggravating 

course of conduct and lack of acceptance of any responsibility. In mitigation, 

respondent has no history of discipline; respondent has undergone some counseling, 

trainings, and other courses related to professional boundaries and sexual harassment; 

and the misconduct occurred approximately three years ago. 

The Praiseworthiness or Blameworthiness of R

Motives 

13. 

not praiseworthy, although it is noted that 

much of the communication between Ms. Record was in the context of a friendship 

where they both shared personal details about their lives. 

28 

The Likelihood of the Recurrence of the Questioned Conduct 

14. 

While 

respondent nominally stated that she would maintain better boundaries in the future, 

it was not established that respondent has been rehabilitated. She continuously 

blamed Ms. Record and provided very little insight about her actions or why they were 

made unprofessional comments to other teachers and created a hostile and 

uncomfortable working environment. Respondent denied most allegations and 

accepted no responsibility for her comments in the face of clear and convincing 

evidence. Respondent's scant acceptance of responsibility does not indicate that she 

has engaged in meaningful introspection about her conduct. While respondent 

indicated that she has taken courses and trainings in areas of professional boundaries, 

there was no corroborating evidence. Similarly, she presented no evidence from a 

mental health professional regarding any treatment she received and her prospects for 

continuing to teach. Consequently, the risk of recurrence of improper conduct is not 

minimal. (

, 

, at p. 1183 (noting it was "likely [the teacher] would 

repeat her unsatisfactory performance since she appeared to be indifferent to the 

seriousness of the problem").) 

Chilling Effect Upon Constitutional Right 

15. 

There is no relationship between her conduct and free speech. 

16. 

In consideration of the 

factors and totality of the circumstances, 

her conduct 

and unfitness for service. 

29 

UNPROFESSIONAL CONDUCT 

17. 

unfitness to teach. (

nduct such as to indicate 

 (1983) 149 

which breaches the rules or ethical code of a profession or conduct which is 

, (1978) 81 Cal. App.3d 564, at 575; 

 (1953) 41 Cal.2d 

546, 553.) 

18. 

Respondent engaged in unprofessional conduct demonstrating an 

unfitness to teach as measured against the 

factors. 

MORAL TURPITUDE/IMMORAL CONDUCT 

19. 

There is broad discretion in determining what constitutes immoral 

conduct in the context of teacher disciplinary matters. (

 (1999) 20 Cal.4th 327.) Immoral conduct has been defined by the 

courts as follows: 

[T]hat which is hostile to the welfare of the general public 

and contrary to good morals. Immorality has not been 

confined to sexual matters, but includes conduct 

inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, 

indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; or as willful, flagrant, or 

shameless conduct showing moral indifference to the 

opinions of respectable members of the community, and as 

an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public 

welfare. (

 (1970) 9 

30 

Cal.App.3d 967, 972, citing 

808, 811.) 

, 179 Cal. App 2d 

 (

 (1980) 102 Cal.App.3d 555, 593 

[t

 (1988) 201 Cal.App.3d 1444, 1453 

immorality . . . are raised in [a] teacher discharge case[ ], the applicable standard is 

20. 

o the 

level of immoral conduct or moral turpitude. 

EVIDENT UNFITNESS TO TEACH 

21. 

Evident unfitness for service is established by conduct demonstrating 

connotes fixed character trait, presumably not remediable merely on receipt of notice 

 (

at p.1444.) It 

threshold matter, the 

 criteria must be examined to ascertain whether the 

 (

) As a 

 criteria are 

at p. 1445.) 

31 

 
 
22.

Respondent has some recognition that she acted inappropriately and has 

sought out classes and counseling relating to professional boundaries. It was not 

established that respondent has a fixed character trait that is not remediable. With a 

proper showing of rehabilitation and acceptance of responsibility, respondent may 

very well be fit to return to the classroom. 

Cause Exists to Revoke 

23. 

Cause exists to 

that she committed acts of unprofessional conduct. (Ed. Code, §§ 44421.) 

24. 

The purpose of an administrative proceeding seeking the revocation or 

suspension of a professional license is not to punish the individual; the purpose is to 

protect the public from dishonest, immoral, disreputable or incompetent practitioners. 

(

at p. 856.) 

conduct is inconsistent with the behavior 

expected of teachers and raises serious concerns about her judgment and 

maintenance of professional boundaries. On this record, respondent has not 

established that she has been rehabilitated such that she is safe to continue teaching 

in public schools. Accordingly, revocation is the only level of discipline sufficient for 

public protection. 

// 

// 

32 

 
 
 
 
ORDER 

All credentials and certificates issued to respondent Cynthia Stroffolino are 

revoked. 

DATE: April 14, 2022

ADAM L. BERG 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings 

33 

 
 
 
