BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Petition to Revoke Probation Against: 

KARA LEE BURNS, Respondent 

Case No. 1-707806261 & 1-995849427 

OAH No. 2021120192 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Vallera J. Johnson, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings 

(OAH), State of California, heard this matter, via video conference, on September 28, 

2022. 

Diane de Kervor, Deputy Attorney General, represented Marie Vixie Sandy, 

Ed.D., Executive Director of the California Commission on Teacher Credentialing. 

Ellen N. Doty, Attorney at Law, of Rothschild, Wishek & Sands, LLP, represented 

Kara Lee Burns.

Testimony and documentary evidence was received. The record was closed, and 

the matter was submitted for decision on September 28, 2022. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Jurisdictional Matters 

1.

Marie Vixie Sands, Ed.D. (complainant) filed this Petition to Revoke 

Probation in her official capacity as the Executive Director of the California 

Commission on Teacher Credentialing (Commission). 

2. 

On January 19, 1994, the Commission issued a Multiple Subject Teaching 

Credential (Credential) to Kara Lee Burns (respondent). At all times relevant to the 

charges in the Petition, the Credential was in full force and effect and will expire on 

May 1, 2026, unless renewed or revoked.

3. 

On April 12, 2011, the Commission issued a Crosscultural, Language and 

Academic Development Certificate (CLAD Certificate) to respondent. At all times 

relevant to the charges in the Petition, the Certificate was in full force and effect and 

has no expiration date.

Prior Disciplinary Action 

4. 

In a disciplinary action entitled “

,” Case No. 1-707806261 and 1- 995849427, the Commission issued a 

Decision and Order, effective August 14, 2020, in which respondent’s Credential and 

Certificate (Credentials) were revoked. However, the revocation was stayed, and 

respondent’s Credentials were placed on probation for five years with certain terms 

and conditions. 

5. 

The factual bases for the discipline are as follows:

2

SUMAC ELEMENTARY 

During the 2016/2017 school year, respondent was assigned as a

kindergarten teacher at Sumac Elementary School in the Los Virgenes 

Unified School District (District). Parents and teachers reported that 

respondent smelled of alcohol while at work. Her face was described as 

being red and her hands shaky. Respondent was seen stumbling. 

LUPIN HILL ELEMENTARY SCHOOL 

  During the 2017/2018 school year, respondent was assigned as a 

kindergarten teacher at Lupin Hill Elementary School in the District. 

  On August 21, 2017, during kindergarten orientation with the kindergartners 

and their parents, respondent’s voice shook and was jittery as she went 

through the orientation packet. She was disorganized during orientation.

Respondent perspired heavily and had the smell of alcohol on her breath.

  On August 23, 2017, the first day of school, respondent appeared at work 

under the influence of alcohol. When she first arrived at school, S.F. smelled 

alcohol on respondent as she walked to her classroom. Parents who 

dropped off their children complained to S.F. that respondent smelled of 

alcohol. 

On this day, respondent’s speech was slurred as she attempted to direct 

students into the classroom. Respondent spoke with her eyes closed, was 

disorganized and was incoherent at times. She had difficulty reading a 

children’s book. Respondent stumbled around the classroom; she walked 

3

into a wall, a chair, and a student. The incident was reported to the Los 

Angeles County Sheriff’s Office, and respondent was arrested.

  On November 14, 2017, the District issued respondent a Notice of 

Unprofessional Conduct. 

  On November 17, 2017, respondent and the District entered into a 

settlement agreement; respondent agreed to an 11-day suspension from 

November 13, 2017, through December 4, 2017. 

CHAPARRAL ELEMENTARY SCHOOL

  After the suspension period, on January 2, 2018, respondent returned to 

work. 

On March 29, 2018, respondent was assigned to work as a substitute 

kindergarten teacher at Chaparral Elementary School. After respondent 

reported for work, K.T. walked into respondent’s classroom to discuss a 

student. While speaking with respondent, K.T. smelled the odor of alcohol. 

  On May 3, 2018, E.R. met with respondent; again, respondent smelled of 

alcohol. 

  On May 21, 2018, D.W. met with respondent to discuss her responsibilities as 

a substitute teacher for the day. During their conversation, respondent 

appeared confused and disoriented. Later that morning, K.L. met with 

respondent about a student. During this meeting, respondent seemed 

confused and disoriented. Respondent kept closing her eyes during the 

meeting. K.L. smelled alcohol on respondent’s breath. S.B. spoke with 

respondent, who seemed disoriented and confused. While speaking with 

4

S.B., respondent kept closing her eyes. S.B. smelled alcohol on respondent’s 

breath. 

The incident was reported to the Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Office. After 

deputies arrived at the school, respondent submitted to a Pre-Alcohol 

Screening test. The results of the test were 0.152 percent blood alcohol 

content (BAC) at 1033 hours and 0.156 BAC at 1038 hours. 

  On October 8, 2018, pursuant to a settlement with this District, respondent 

resigned with allegations of misconduct pending. 

Probation Conditions 

6. 

At all times after the effective date of the Commission’s Decision and 

Order placing respondent on probation, Condition 13 stated:

Violation of Probation. If Respondent violates any term or 

condition of this order, the Commission may refer the 

matter to the Attorney General’s Office to file a Petition to 

Revoke Probation, and after giving Respondent notice and 

an opportunity to be heard, may set aside the stay order 

and impose the stayed discipline. If during the period of 

probation, a Petition to Revoke Probation has been filed 

against Respondent’s credentials, or if the Attorney 

General’s Office has been asked to prepare a Petition to 

Revoke Probation against Respondent’s Credentials, the 

probationary period shall be extended and shall not expire 

until final action is taken on the Petition by the Commission.

5

7. 

At all times after the effective date of the Commission’s Decision and 

Order placing respondent on probation, Condition 10 stated:

Submit to Tests and Samples. Respondent shall submit to 

bodily fluid testing for the presence of alcohol, cannabis, or 

controlled substances at the request of Respondent’s 

employer, immediate supervisor, or law enforcement. 

In addition, Respondent shall, at her expense, fully 

cooperate with the Commission or any of its 

representatives, including the assigned compliance monitor, 

during the period of probation and shall, when requested, 

submit to such tests and samples as the Commission or the 

assigned monitor may require for the detection of alcohol, 

cannabis, or controlled substances. 

Respondent’s failure or refusal to submit to testing as 

required above shall constitute a probation violation. In 

addition, any positive test for alcohol, cannabis, or a 

controlled substance, not lawfully prescribed by a 

licensed health care professional as part of documented 

medical treatment, shall constitute a probation 

violation. Two diluted test results during the period of 

probation shall also constitute a violation of probation.

8. 

At all times after the effective date of Respondent’s probation, Condition 

9 stated: 

6

Abstain from Possession, Consumption, or Use of 

Alcohol, Cannabis, and Controlled Substances. 

Respondent shall completely abstain from the possession, 

consumption, or use of alcohol, cannabis, and controlled 

substances, except when ordered by a health care 

professional legally authorized to do so as part of 

documented medical treatment. Respondent shall provide 

documentation of prescriptions, recommendations, orders, 

and treatment plans of health care professionals for the use 

of these prohibited substances within five days following 

the request of the monitor. Failure to comply with these 

provisions shall be a violation of probation. 

9. 

At all times after the effective date of probation, Condition 2 stated: 

Compliance with All Terms of Probation. Respondent 

shall fully comply with all the terms and conditions of this 

Order and cooperate with the California Commission on 

Teacher Credentialing (Commission) and her assigned 

probation compliance monitor (monitor) in the monitoring 

and investigation of Respondent’s compliance with 

probation terms. Respondent shall participate in a 

telephone or in-person review of the probation terms with 

Respondent’s assigned monitor. Failure to participate in the 

review of probation terms within the time stated above 

shall be considered a probation violation. 

7

Respondent shall also respond to all requests made by the 

monitor, responding to written requests sent by mail within 

14 calendar days of the request, and within two business 

days after a telephone message or email request, unless a 

different time period is otherwise stated in this Order. 

Failure to respond within the time specified shall be 

considered a probation violation. 

Violations 

10. 

Between August 2020 and November 2021, Sarah Mistler, a Commission 

investigator (investigator Mistler), served as respondent’s probation monitor. 

11.

On September 4, 2020, investigator Mistler conducted a probation 

orientation with respondent; they discussed the terms of respondent’s probation; 

respondent stated she took no medication that would interfere with her obligation to 

comply with Condition 9 (Abstain from Possession, Consumption, or Use of 

Alcohol, Cannabis, and Controlled Substances.) 

12.

As part of her duties, investigator Mistler contacted respondent, 

periodically and at random, to tell her to go for alcohol/drug testing.

On March 4, 2021, she called and texted respondent, letting her know that she 

should go to test for alcohol/drugs that day. Respondent confirmed that she received 

investigator Mistler’s message. In compliance with the probation monitor’s order, on 

March 4, 2021, respondent submitted a urine specimen for testing.

On March 11, 2021, the sample tested positive for ethyl glucuronide (EtG) and

ethyl sulfate (EtS), metabolites of alcohol. Investigator Mistler received an email from 

8

Momeau Shepell Drug Testing Center stating respondent received a positive-dilute 

test for alcohol.

13. 

As a result of the test result (Finding 12), by letter, dated March 22, 2021, 

investigator Mistler notified respondent of the probation violation, that the matter 

would be referred to the Office of the Attorney General for the filing of a Petition to 

Revoke Probation, and that she would remain on probation until final action was taken 

on the Petition by the Commission. 

14. 

Respondent’s probation is subject to revocation for failure to comply 

with Probation Conditions 13, 10, 9, and 2. 

Explanation and Rehabilitation 

15.  On May 27, 2021, respondent filed a quarterly report covering the period 

February 15, 2021, to May 14, 2021. In this report, respondent disclosed that she 

violated probation because she was found to have alcohol in her system on March 4, 

2021.

16. 

Respondent explained the facts and circumstances underlying her 

relapse. On the evening of March 3, 2021, she and her husband of 29 years were in the 

process of divorce and had lived separately since February 2019. He moved back into 

the home to help prepare it for sale. Her son was present as well. Both men drank 

alcohol and had alcohol in the home. In the past, this had not been a problem for 

respondent. However, March 3, 2021, had been a day of particularly stressful 

interactions between her (now ex) husband and respondent. As she was preparing to 

go to bed, she went into the kitchen, found a bottle of alcohol, and drank from the 

bottle. The next morning, she received the call from her probation monitor instructing 

her to report for testing. She has not had a drink of alcohol since March 3, 2021.

9

17. 

Respondent is devastated, embarrassed and remorseful. She understands 

that, considering her misconduct which led to discipline of her certificates, she was 

fortunate to be given another chance by Commission and put on probation; drinking 

the alcoholic beverage was a tremendous mistake, and she regretted it immediately. 

18. 

Respondent acknowledges she is an alcoholic, and alcohol is poison for 

her. When she experienced her relapse in March 2021, respondent acted immediately 

to address the relapse. 

19. 

Respondent took steps to avoid being around alcohol and the stressful 

situation. She moved from the home and into an apartment. Since the incident, she 

has not been around her ex-husband, except to turn over the keys to their home (June 

2021) and at her father’s funeral (July 2022). Her son now lives in San Diego, not 

around respondent. Since March 2021, respondent has experienced stressful events, 

such as her divorce (August 2022), the death of her father (July 2022), serving as the 

trustee of her father’s estate, paying his debts, dividing his assets and working with her 

siblings to sell his home. 

20. 

Immediately following her relapse, respondent increased her attendance 

at Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) meetings. According to the terms of her probation, she 

is required to attend at least one AA meeting a week. After her relapse, respondent 

began and continues to attend AA meetings four to five times a week. When she was 

no longer able to do so in person, respondent attended meetings by Zoom. 

Respondent finds AA meetings “encouraging and beneficial”. It has been helpful 

for her to hear from participants who have been in similar situations and have 

overcome the temptation to drink. 

10 

Respondent has become a member of several online communities of recovering 

women and participates in online meetings and “exchanges through these groups.” 

Since her relapse, she has read books regarding women and alcoholism. In their 

stories, she has learned about the inherent risks in drinking alcohol, the positive role 

models, and the success that has come to women who abstain from drinking. 

21. 

Respondent provided evidence of the treatment and therapy she has 

received since September 9, 2017, when she began her efforts at sobriety. She has 

participated in treatment in the Kaiser Permanente Behavioral Health Clinic, 

Department of Addiction Medicine, Chemical Dependency Recovery Program; in 

addition to therapy, she has completed a three-week intensive outpatient program for 

recovery, weekly relapse prevention group meetings, the return-to-work intensive 

outpatient program and a six-week mindfulness group. According to letters from her 

therapist, respondent voluntarily participated in therapy and these programs. In a 

letter, dated February 27, 2018, her therapist stated respondent demonstrated “such 

high clinical progress” that she reduced the number of sessions respondent attended. 

These programs were completed prior to incidents that were bases for discipline. 

22. 

Since March 3, 2021, respondent has increased her therapy to once a 

week. In June 2021 respondent had a “mental shift” in her thinking regarding alcohol. 

She has changed from thinking of herself as a “person who is not allowed to drink 

alcohol,” to a “person who chooses not to drink alcohol.” Respondent believes this is a 

healthier way of thinking for herself. According to respondent, her therapist believes 

this shows growth as a person. When in a situation with alcohol present, respondent 

no longer feels punished, misses it, or wishes to have a sip. Instead, she enjoys the 

social time and the feeling of going home and waking up sober. 

11 

23. 

Respondent provided evidence to establish she has remained sober since 

March 3, 2021. 

24. 

Except for violation in March 2021, respondent has complied with all 

terms of probation, including testing negative for alcohol. 

25. 

In addition to compliance with the terms of probation, she has been 

testing with Soberlink, a breathalyzer test that provides results instantly and relies on

facial recognition. Between October 9, 2021, and September 20, 2022, respondent has 

been testing twice daily through Soberlink, in the morning and in the evening. The 

results are sent to her therapist and the principal at the school at which she teaches. 

All results have been negative, except once; respondent explained that, on July 11, 

2022, there was an environmental issue; on that date, following her father’s death, she 

travelled to her family home; according to the test result, “the identity was declined” 

because the room was too dark; she missed the next test because she fell asleep. 

Respondent is willing to continue with Soberlink, at her cost, as a condition of 

probation. 

26. 

Respondent had a hair follicle test to confirm that she was not only sober 

but had been at least 90 days prior to testing. On August 17, 2022, a hair follicle was 

collected from respondent to test whether she had ethyl glucuronide in her system; 

the hair follicle test is valid for 90 days prior to the test date. The results were negative 

for ethyl glucuronide, which meant she had no alcohol in her system. 

27.

Respondent explained that she had remained sober through stressful 

events, such as her divorce, the death of her father and working with her siblings on 

her father’s estate. 

12 

28. 

Respondent explained she is a different person from the woman who 

engaged in the misconduct which resulted in her discipline. Except for drinking alcohol 

on March 3, 2021, she has not violated the terms of probation or engaged in any 

misconduct. She has not driven under the influence of alcohol; she has not missed 

work because of alcohol. 

29. 

Respondent loves teaching and always has. She testified about the 

reasons that she does and established that she is a good teacher. In addition to her 

own testimony, respondent provided: (1) her evaluations prior to the incidents that 

resulted in her discipline, (2) letters of support from family, friends, and colleagues, 

and (3) the testimony of administrators at the school at which she teaches in support 

of the foregoing. 

30. 

During her career, respondent has received evaluations as a teacher that 

met or exceeded standards. 

31. 

Respondent provided 24 letters of support from family, friends, and 

colleagues. They are dated in or about 2019 and appear to have been written in 

support of respondent before the Commission placed her on probation. Others appear 

to support her application for employment. Only a few writers appear to be aware of 

that the Commission was seeking to discipline respondent’s credentials. The writers of 

the letters attest to her skills and character traits as a teacher. 

32. 

Since September 2021 respondent has been employed at Ivy Academia 

Entrepreneurial Charter School. For the 2021/2022 school year, she taught fifth grade; 

for the current school year, she teaches kindergarten. 

Joe Herzog, Executive Director, and Thomas Kuhny, principal, of the school, 

testified on respondent’s behalf. These school administrators are familiar with 

13 

respondent, her duties at the school and have had an opportunity to observe her 

during her employment. Respondent provided each of them with a copy of the 

Commission’s Consent Determination and Order, which set forth the factual and legal 

bases for discipline and the terms of probation. 

Administrators at the charter school, at which she teaches, believe respondent 

will reinvigorate the kindergarten program and will help increase the number of 

students at the school. In addition, the administrators have asked respondent to serve 

as a mentor teacher in the California Induction Program for less experienced teachers 

or teachers who are new to the district. Even without being a mentor, respondent has 

assisted new or returning teachers to maneuver within the school program. 

Respondent is proud that her abilities in education have been noticed and valued. 

33. 

Except for the violation of probation in March 2021, respondent has 

violated no other terms of probation. 

Other Facts Considered 

34. 

Respondent admitted she relapsed twice, on May 21, 2018, and again on 

March 3, 2021. She had great difficulty admitting that she relapsed on May 3, 2018. 

This caused the trier of fact concern about respondent’s ability to continue her 

compliance with the Commission’s terms of probation. However, despite this 

testimony, respondent’s actions, and her attitude change since March 3, 2021, cannot 

be disregarded and are considered.

35. 

The administrators at the school at which respondent teaches deeply 

respect her and described the service she has provided to the school, teachers, 

parents, and students and would expect her to continue to provide if allowed to retain 

her Credentials. However, they are aware of her violations and would not tolerate her 

14 

presence at school while under the influence of alcohol or even after drinking alcoholic 

beverages. Their concern, as the Commission’s, is the best interest of the families and 

students who attend their school. As such, they are available to provide another source 

of monitoring of respondent’s sobriety. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1. 

In a disciplinary action entitled

, the Commission issued a Decision and Order, effective August 14, 2020, in 

which respondent’s Credentials were revoked; the revocation was stayed, and 

respondent’s credentials were placed on probation for five years with terms and 

conditions.

Respondent violated Conditions 10 (Submit to Tests and Samples), Condition 9 

(Failure to Abstain from Alcohol), and Condition 2 (Failure to Comply with Probation) 

when she tested positive for alcohol on March 4, 2021. 

2. 

Considering the factual bases for discipline of respondent’s Credentials 

and her violation of the terms of probation, the issue is the appropriate measure of 

discipline. The Commission seeks revocation of probation and imposition of the 

disciplinary order that was stayed revoking respondent’s Credentials. Respondent 

seeks to maintain her Certificates on whatever terms the Commission deems 

appropriate. Respondent should be allowed to maintain her credentials only if the 

people, including students, can be adequately protected. Otherwise, respondent’s 

Credentials should be revoked.

There is no issue regarding respondent’s competency as a teacher. The problem 

is her alcoholism and her failure to cope with her disease. The factual bases for her 

15 

discipline were egregious. Repeatedly, she exercised poor judgment and went to 

school in the presence of students, parents, and colleagues while under the influence. 

Some of the incidents occurred while she was receiving therapy. Despite being given a 

“second chance” and being placed on probation, after meeting with a probation 

monitor and discussing the terms of probation, seven months later, respondent 

violated the terms of probation by testing positive for alcohol. Consideration has been 

given to her failure to acknowledge her relapse on May 3, 2018. However, based on (1) 

the evidence of her conduct that resulted in discipline of her license, (2) her actions 

since the relapse on March 3, 2021, and (3) her demeanor during the hearing, 

respondent demonstrated that she takes her sobriety and probation seriously, has 

increased her efforts at sobriety and has successfully done so. 

Additional terms of probation can be included to protect the public, including 

having the option of including SoberLink and requiring her administrator to notify the 

Commission should respondent appear at work under the influence. 

ORDER 

1. 

The Commission on Teacher Credentialing’s request to revoke probation 

and to revoke the Multiple Subject Teaching Credential and Crosscultural, Language

and Academic Development Certificate issued to Kara Lee Burns is denied.

2. 

The Multiple Subject Teaching Credential and Crosscultural, Language 

and Academic Development Certificate issued to respondent Kara Lee Burns are 

revoked, the revocation is stayed, respondent’s probation is reinstated and respondent 

shall remain on probation until August 20, 2025, subject to the same terms and 

conditions and shall include the following additional terms and conditions. 

16 

17.

SoberLink Reports. No later than 30 days from the 

effective date of this decision, respondent shall provide 

evidence that she is continuing to participate in SoberLink 

monitoring, at her cost. She shall test twice a day, in the 

morning and in the evening. The results shall be provided 

to an administrator at the school at which respondent 

works and to an individual designated by the Commission. 

Respondent shall notify the Commission or Commission 

designee of who the administrator is at her school. 

A positive test result for any substance prohibited by the 

terms of probation shall constitute a violation of probation. 

Failure to test, without excuse, shall constitute a violation of 

probation. 

The Commission or its designee may issue a Cease Practice 

letter and may refer the matter to the Office of the Attorney 

General for the filing of Petition to Revoke Probation. The 

terms of probation shall remain in effect until the matter is 

resolved.

18. 

Administrative Notification. Prior to commencing 

or resuming work at any school, an administrator at the 

school shall be identified who will notify the Commission or 

its designee, if respondent appears at work under the 

influence of alcohol. The notification shall be in writing and 

within 24 hours of such an incident. 

17 

Respondent shall provide the name of the administrator

and acknowledgment of the administrator that he/she is 

willing to assume this responsibility. Both the name of the 

administrator and the acknowledgment shall be in writing

and is respondent’s obligation to provide to the 

Commission or its designee.

If the Commission or its designee receives notice 

respondent has appeared at work while under the influence 

of alcohol, this shall constitute a violation of probation. The 

Commission may issue a Cease Practice letter and may refer 

the matter to the Office of the Attorney General for the 

filing of Petition to Revoke Probation. Respondent shall 

remain on probation until the matter is resolved.

DATE: October 20, 2022

VALLERA J. JOHNSON

Administrative Law Judge

Office of Administrative Hearings

18

