BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Accusation against: 

KURT JOSEPH WILKINS, Respondent 

Agency Case No. 2-72314178 

OAH No. 2021110315 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Erin R. Koch-Goodman, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative 

Hearings (OAH), State of California, heard this matter on May 9, 2022, by 

videoconference from Sacramento, California. 

Mabel Lew, Deputy Attorney General, represented Mary Vixie Sandy, Ed.D. 

(complainant), Executive Director, California Commission on Teacher Credentialing 

(CTC or Commission). 

Matthew H. Smith, Attorney at Law, represented Kurt Joseph Wilkins 

(respondent), who appeared at hearing. 

Oral and documentary evidence was received, the record closed, and the matter 

was submitted for decision on May 9, 2022. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Jurisdictional Matters 

1. 

On May 31, 1999, the CTC issued a Single Subject Teaching Credential 

(Credential) to respondent. The Credential authorizes respondent to teach grades 12 

and below, including preschool and in classes organized primarily for adults in 

Introductory English and Social Studies. The Credential must be renewed every five 

years, and will expire on June 1, 2024, unless renewed or revoked. 

2. 

On April 15, 2010, the CTC issued a Crosscultural Language and 

Academic Development Certificate (Certificate) to respondent. The Certificate 

authorizes respondent to teach limited-English-proficient pupils, with specifically 

designed content instruction delivered in English, to grades 12 and below, including 

preschool and in classes organized primarily for adults in Introductory English and 

Social Studies. The Certificate is not renewed but remains in force as long as the valid 

prerequisite credential or permit is held concurrently. 

Accusation 

3. 

On May 21, 2021, complainant issued an Accusation against respondent, 

alleging he acted unprofessionally, engaged in immoral conduct, displayed moral 

turpitude and an evident unfitness for service while working as a teacher and athletic 

coach for Corning Union High School (CUHS). Complainant seeks to revoke 

, and accompanying Certificate, because he repeatedly took 

money for his own personal use from a CUHS boys

checking account and 

continued to do so even after being instructed by CUHS District (District) personnel to 

close the account. 

2 

4.

On or about May 28, 2021, respondent appealed and requested an 

administrative hearing pursuant to Government Code sections 11505 and 11506. This 

hearing followed. 

Conduct at Issue 

5. 

At all times relevant, respondent taught Government and Economics; was 

the faculty Senior Class Advisor; and the Head Coach for the Varsity Boys Basketball 

and Golf teams at CUHS. In or about April 2014, a retiring basketball coach transferred 

respondent control of a Banner Bank checking account (account) designated for the 

 Respondent has managed the account ever since. In 

2015, respondent began making withdrawals from the account and using the money 

for his own personal needs; in most instances, respondent would then deposit money 

back into the account before withdrawing money again. He withdrew money 

approximately 30 times for a total of approximately $9,000, until 2019, when District 

personnel discovered his conduct. 

6. 

In or about April 2019, Justine Felton, CUHS Associate Principal and 

District Athletic Administrator, questioned respondent about the funds he was using to 

pay for 

pizza lunches; she told him she had not seen a 

purchase order (PO) come through the Associated Student Body (ASB) account for the 

same. Respondent reported using funds from the account for the pizzas. Ms. Felton 

was unaware a private account existed to fund any school sports and believed the 

account did not comply with the statewide education and athletic reporting 

requirements. Ms. Felton spoke to Jared Caylor, District Superintendent, and shared 

her concerns about the account. Mr. Caylor agreed and directed the account be closed 

and the monies transferred to a CUHS ASB or Boosters account. 

3 

7.

On May 8, 2019, Ms. Felton sent respondent an email, directing him to 

close the account and deposit any further boys  basketball money into a CUHS ASB or 

Sports Boosters account; or, he could convert the account into a  503C non-profit  

boosters account and have no one associated with the basketball program designated 

as a signatory. 

8. 

On May 10, respondent wrote a check from the account to Cardinal 

Apparel for $300 and on May 12, respondent wrote a check from the account to 

Northstate Shooting Academy for $250. At the same time, Ms. Felton made additional 

requests for respondent to close the account, until respondent did so on May 22, 

2019. Thereafter, Ms. Felton and Mr. Caylor made repeated requests for respondent to 

provide copies of the monthly statements for the account. 

9. 

On June 20, 2019, Mr. Caylor again emailed respondent demanding the 

monthly account statements by June 21, before 2:00 p.m. Respondent complied, 

providing Mr. Caylor with monthly statements for the account for the previous three 

years; the bank had been purchased three years before and did not have access to the 

previous bank records. Respondent delivered the monthly statements to Mr. Caylor 

Mr. Caylor reviewed the 

monthly statements and found, in the past three years, respondent had made $3,900 

in cash withdrawals; written checks to: himself for a total of $4,930.30; his wife for 

$344.48; a made-up vendor   Cardinal Apparel for $1,302.50; 

for $100; Northstate Shooting Academy, a gun range, for 

 use of the 

facility for $250 and to LSGR (Lake Shasta Golf Resort), a vacation rental location his 

family visited, for $401. In addition, the account had incurred $848.60 in overdraft fees 

cash withdrawals and check writing. 

4 

10.

On June 24, 2019, and July 31, 2019, Mr. Caylor met with respondent 

regarding his use of the account. At the July 31, 2019 meeting, respondent admitted, 

between 2015 and June 2019, he took money from the account approximately 30 

times for a total of $9,000 for his own personal use, but he had also repaid the account 

each time, totaling $7,450 to date. On August 2, 2019, respondent resigned from his 

position with CUHS, effective December 31, 2019. 

11. 

In March 2020, the District and respondent agreed to a $50/month 

repayment plan for the remaining balance respondent owed to the account totaling 

$2,348.69 ($1,500 in withdrawals and $848.69 in overdraft fees). Between March and 

January 2021, respondent made seven payments to the District totaling $2,400. 

Evidence 

12. 

Respondent admits 

 money from the account approximately 

30 times but repaying the same before withdrawing money again. 

and was unable to 

in 

2010 and she was unable to work; she remained unable to work through 2016, having 

been diagnosed with multiple diseases including breast cancer in 2015 and 

undergoing five reconstructive surgeries in 2016. Without her income, respondent 

became unable to meet their 

monthly debts. Initially, respondent took a high 

interest loan to get cash quickly, but the family remained unable to make ends meet. 

Then, 

 father got sick, and in April 2019, he passed away. On April 

30, May 1 and 3, respondent took bereavement leave. Respondent admits being 

embarrassed 

financial needs and he has always had a 

hard time asking for help. 

5 

13.

At hearing, respondent acknowledged what he did was wrong. He 

He accepted 

responsibility for his conduct by resigning from his position at CUHS and repaying all 

monies owed to the account. He 

, but instead, stayed in 

the Corning community to face people and 

Ultimately, respondent 

believes no students were harmed by his conduct and he should be permitted to 

retain his Credential. He is a good teacher and is committed to his students. Currently, 

respondent is teaching at the Buckeye School of the Arts and Mountain Lakes High 

School/Gateway Educational Options in the Gateway Unified School District (Gateway), 

as well as Las Plumas High School in the Oroville Union High School District (Oroville). 

He was forthcoming in his interviews with Gateway and Oroville about his conduct and 

resignation from CUHS. 

CHARACTER LETTERS 

14. 

Respondent offered five letters of support from academic professionals: 

from Angela Gonzales, Principal, Buckeye School of the Arts, signed and dated May 5, 

2021; Charlie Troughton, Associate Principal, CUHS, signed and dated July 19, 2021; 

Larry Glover, Head Varsity Coach, CUHS, signed but not dated; Jessica Libbee, 

Principal, Mountain Lakes High School/Gateway Educational Options, signed and 

dated June 11, 2021; and Dr. Lamar T. Collins, Principal, Las Plumas High School, 

Oroville Union High School District, signed and dated March 4, 2022. 

Uniformly, the authors describe respondent with positive attributes: he is 

; he 

; and he 

note he 

. All letters 

 They describe respondent as 

6 

acknowledge 

but note that  no one was harmed

his conduct and he should be permitted to continue to teach. 

15. 

In addition, respondent offered two emails and one letter from former 

students: from Les Pitner, athlete and assistant athletic coach, sent an email dated June 

20, 2021; Manuel Garcia, student, CUHS Class of 2015, sent an email dated July 20, 

2021; and Noah Zoppi, student, CUHS Class of 2018, offered a letter dated July 21, 

2021. None of the three former student statements were signed and Mr. Garcia and 

. 

Notwithstanding, t

16. 

Finally, respondent offered a letter from Don Scherba, Marriage and 

Family Therapist, signed and dated June 21, 2021. Mr. Scherba reported monthly visits 

-monthly meetings for approximately one 

[respondent] through this I have seen significant growth as it pertains to him being 

more accountable and self-disclosing with me and others close to him regarding how 

he 

7 

 
 
Analysis 

17. 

Teachers, as well as athletic coaches are role models for their students. 

They are responsible for guiding students in the right direction and modeling good 

behavior and judgement. "There are certain professions which impose upon persons 

attracted to them, responsibilities and limitations on freedom of action which do not 

exist in regard to other callings. Public officials such as . . . schoolteachers fall into such 

a category." (

 (1971) 16 Cal.App.3d 820, 824.) 

18.  While acting as a teacher and coach, respondent withdrew at least $9,000 

from a checking account dedicated to support the activities/needs of CUHS basketball 

players for his own personal use. His behavior was not a one-time, isolated incident, 

but rather, repeated failures to make good choices: withdrawing funds from the 

account at least 

by 

writing two additional checks for his own benefit; with one being to the made-up 

vendor showing further subterfuge. Ultimately, each time respondent took money 

from the account, he displayed exceptionally poor decision making, a complete lack of 

good judgment, and an absolute disregard for the needs of his student athletes and 

the boosters supporting CUHS. 

19. 

Respondent not only withdrew funds from the account under his name 

and hi

fraudulent athletic expenses from a made-up 

company (e.g., Cardinal Apparel), and even brazenly wrote checks from the account 

Responden

, fraudulent, and corrupt. In addition, 

respondent

 withdrawals knowingly allowed the account to go into arrears, causing 

, and LSGR for a vacation). 

the account to accrue $848.60 in overdraft fees. 

8 

20.

At hearing, respondent acknowledged the wrongfulness of taking money 

from the account. However, he dismissed the same as insignificant, because he 

returned all of the money he  borrowed  from the account. He does not believe he 

harmed anyone 

 and paying it back. Instead, 

he believes he is still capable of teaching and coaching.  

21. 

-assessment lacks substantial insight. He fails to 

acknowledge the obvious effects his continued leadership will have on students (i.e., it 

is acceptable to take what does not belong to you, as long as you pay/put it back; and 

students should do as I say and not as I do) and boosters (i.e., they will be reticent to 

donate again because of the lack of accountability, transparency, and risk of the same 

or similar behavior occurring again with other teachers or District personnel). 

Moreover, his failure to see the damage caused by his conduct evidences an inability 

behavior and judgment. 

22. 

Respondent offered many letters of support. They each speak to his 

ability to teach and coach. However, 

and coaching ability 

is not at issue. It is his judgment and decision making that is in question. Based on the 

evidence, respondent lacks the necessary judgment required to continue to be trusted 

by the CTC to protect the interests of students and the educational community going 

forward. 

23. 

Based upon the Factual Findings as a whole, respondent is subject to 

discipline by the Commission, and his Credential and Certificate should be revoked. 

Respondent's misconduct was dishonest, fraudulent, and corrupt and represents a 

serious violation of trust and leadership at a time when he was serving as a teacher 

and coach. For all the foregoing reasons, respondent cannot be regarded as fit to 

9 

teach or resume a position of authority and trust within the California educational 

system. Therefore, revocation of his Credential and Certificate is warranted. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

Burden and Standard of Proof 

1. 

In an administrative proceeding in which a licensing agency seeks the 

suspension or revocation of an existing, professional license, the standard of proof is 

clear and convincing evidence to a reasonable certainty. (

 (1982) 135 Cal.App.3d 583.) Clear and convincing evidence requires 

proof that is so clear as to leave no substantial doubt and that is sufficiently strong to 

command the unhesitating assent of every reasonable mind. (

(2008) 169 Cal.App.4th 176, 190.) 

2. 

The burden of proving the charges rests upon the party making the 

charges. (

 (2008) 165 Cal.App.4th 1, 4.) 

Therefore, complainant bears the burden of proving the existence of grounds for 

 and Certificate, and such evidence must be clear 

and convincing to a reasonable certainty. (See 

 (1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1036, 1039-1040 [recognizing that the clear and 

credential, whereas the lesser preponderance of the evidence standard applies to 

proceedings to dismiss a teacher from particular employment].) 

10 

 
Causes for Discipline 

3. 

The Commission may revoke a teaching credential for unprofessional 

conduct, immoral conduct, evident unfitness for service and acts of moral turpitude. 

(Ed. Code, § 44421.) 

IMMORAL OR ACTS OF MORAL TURPITUDE 

4. 

welfare of the general public 

confined to sexual matters, but includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude or 

indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; or as willful, flagrant or 

shameless conduct showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable 

members of the community, and an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the 

 (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811.) The immoral conduct of a teacher 

.) 

UNPROFESSIONAL CONDUCT AND FITNESS TO TEACH 

5. 

Unprofessional Conduct is "conduct that violates the rules or ethical code 

of a profession or is unbecoming a member of a profession in good standing." (

 (1953) 41 Cal.2d 546, 553.) For teachers

 (1983) 149 Cal.App.3d 1167, 1174.) The California Supreme 

Court has delineated the factors for determining whether particular conduct 

demonstrates unfitness to teach 

 Factors. (See, 

(1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 229-230 [analyzing former Ed. Code, § 13202, predecessor to Ed. 

11 

 
 
Code, § 44421.) The Commission has adopted the 

Factors in California Code 

of Regulations, title 5, section 80302, subdivision (a). 

(1) The likelihood that the conduct may have adversely 

affected students, fellow teachers, or the educational 

community, and the degree of such adversity anticipated; 

(2) The proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct; 

(3) The type of credential held or applied for by the person 

involved; 

(4) The extenuating or aggravating circumstances 

surrounding the conduct; 

(5) The praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives 

resulting in the conduct; 

(6) The likelihood of the recurrence of the questioned 

conduct; 

(7) The extent to which disciplinary action may inflict an 

adverse impact or chilling effect upon the constitutional 

rights of the person involved, or other certified persons; 

(8) The publicity or notoriety given to the conduct. 

6. 

unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of temperamental defects or 

inadequacies. (

 (1969) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444-1445.) Unlike unprofessional conduct, 

12 

evident unfitness for service connotes a fixed character trait, presumably not 

standards. (

.) First, the 

 Factors must be analyzed as a threshold matter to 

determine if the conduct indicates unfitness for service. (

.) If the 

 Factors 

o meet professional 

.) 

Causes for Adverse Action 

7. 

Based upon the Factual Findings as a whole, cause exists under Education 

Code section 44421, for adverse action 

and Certificate 

on the grounds of immoral acts and acts of moral turpitude. Respondent repeatedly, at 

least 30 times, withdrew funds from an account dedicated to the activities/needs of 

the CUHS boys  basketball program, totaling at least $9,000, for his own personal use. 

8. 

Based upon the Factual Findings as a whole, cause exists under Education 

Code section 44421, for adverse action 

and Certificate 

on the grounds of unprofessional conduct and evident unfitness for service. Applying 

the 

From 2015 through 2019, respondent used his Credential to teach and coach at CUHS. 

His Credential gave him access to an account holding money dedicated to student 

athlete activities/needs. Respondent took money from the account at least 30 times. 

His conduct was dishonest, not only in taking the money for his own personal needs, 

but because he repeatedly acted with deceit, writing checks to himself, his wife, to a 

made-up vendor for alleged athletic expenses, and for discretionary needs of himself 

and his family. Respondent

decision making. 

 good judgment and 

13 

 
Moreover, at hearing, respondent failed to see the clear consequences of his 

behavior on students, faculty, the District, and the Corning community. As a teacher 

and coach, he is a role-model and leader for students and athletes. However, his 

conduct tells students it is acceptable to take from others, as long as you pay/put it 

back; and going forward, he would disingenuously direct students to do as I say and 

not as I do. In addition, his conduct causes mistrust in his fellow teachers and coaches, 

because again, it is acceptable to take from others, as long as you pay/put it back. His 

behavior also causes mistrust in teachers and the District and will affect booster 

contributions going forward, because with respondent, the District was unable to 

maintain and account for funds donated by boosters and may not be able to do so in 

the future; thereby discouraging future endowments to CUHS and the District. 

Finally

1, including: 

multiple acts of wrongdoing or a pattern of misconduct (taking money at least 30 

times and continuing to write checks from the account for his own personal needs, 

even after being directed to close the account); the misconduct included bad faith or 

dishonesty (writing checks to a made-up vendor for alleged athletic expenses and for 

holder, or significantly harmed the public or the educational system (students who 

); harmed a child entrusted to the care of a credential 

conduct and boosters may 

1 

 that 

a greater degree of adverse action for an act of professional misconduct is needed to 

adequately protect the public, schoolchildren or the profession. 

14 

 
never again provide sponsorship to the CUHS). (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80300, subd. 

(b)(2) - (4).)

9.

Ultimately, the evidence established respondent lacks the good 

judgement and decision making required to continue to teach and coach students. 

Moreover, he lacks the insight necessary to believe he can make better and more 

trustworthy decisions going forward. The CTC must protect the public and cannot risk 

respondent again failing to see the wrongfulness of conduct before he acts

inappropriately.

10.

and Certificate. 

Based upon the Factual Findings as a whole, complainant has proven respondent 

engaged in immoral acts or acts of moral turpitude, as well as unprofessional conduct 

and possesses an evident unfitness for service. For all the above reasons, the public 

inte

and Certificate be revoked.

ORDER

Respondent Kurt Joseph Wilkins Single Subject Teaching Credential and 

Crosscultural Language and Academic Development Certificate are hereby REVOKED.

DATE: June 8, 2022

ERIN R. KOCH-GOODMAN

Administrative Law Judge

Office of Administrative Hearings

15

