BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Statement of Issues Against: 

MATTHEW FRANCIS WOOD, Respondent 

Case No. 2-88587744 

OAH No. 2021080773 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Timothy J. Aspinwall, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative 

Hearings (OAH), State of California, heard this matter by video conference on February 

3, 2022, from Sacramento, California. 

Brent O. Jex, Deputy Attorney General, represented complainant Mary Vixie 

Sandy, Ed.D. (complainant), Executive Director of the California Commission on 

Teacher Credentialing (Commission). 

Jonathan C. Turner, Attorney at Law, represented Matthew Francis Wood 

(respondent) who was present. 

Evidence was received, the record closed, and the matter submitted on February 

3, 2022.

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Background and Jurisdictional Matters 

1.

On December 4, 2019, the Commission received respondent’s application 

for a certificate of clearance. On December 4, 2019, respondent certified, under 

penalty of perjury, the truthfulness of all statements, answers, and representations in 

the application. 

2. 

During January 20 through 22, 2021, the Committee of Credentials 

(Committee) recommended denial of respondent’s application based on allegations 

that he had been convicted of misdemeanors in 2004 (wet reckless driving), 2009 

(driving under the influence (DUI)), and 2015 (disorderly conduct), and that he failed to 

disclose the 2004 and 2015 convictions in his application. Respondent appealed the 

denial, and this hearing followed.

Complainant’s Evidence 

MISDEMEANOR CONVICTIONS

3. 

On April 13, 2015, in Tahoe Justice Court, Douglas County, Nevada, Case 

No. 15CR0111, respondent was convicted on his guilty plea of violating Douglas 

County Code section 9.24.030, disorderly conduct, a misdemeanor. The court 

sentenced respondent to pay a $900 fine. 

4. 

The circumstances leading to respondent’s 2015 conviction are partially 

summarized in a letter dated September 24, 2020, from respondent to the Committee 

in which he provides an explanation of his convictions and his failure to disclose his 

2 

2004 and 2015 convictions in his application. With respect to the 2015 conviction, 

respondent’s letter states:  

The disorderly conduct in Reno in 2015 is the most 

shameful moment in my life. I do not recall any of the 

things that are written in that arrest report to this day. My 

friends and I were in Reno for a bachelor party and things 

clearly got out of hand. I have never done anything like that 

or acted in that manner ever before and I will most certainly 

make sure it never happens again. 

5. 

The arrest reports prepared by Douglas County Sheriff’s deputies were 

admitted in evidence as administrative hearsay pursuant to Government Code section 

11513, subdivision (d), to supplement and explain respondent’s written admission and 

testimony regarding the circumstances leading to his 2015 conviction. As 

administrative hearsay, the arrest reports are insufficient, standing alone, to support a 

factual finding. Respondent does not have any recollection of the events other than 

that he was in Reno for a bachelor party, drank too much alcohol, and ended up in jail. 

The arrest reports supplement and explain respondent’s testimony, to the extent that 

he was arrested for disorderly conduct and transported to jail.

6. 

Complainant did not submit court records to prove the 2004 or 2009

convictions. However, respondent’s September 24, 2020 letter to the Committee 

includes the following: 

The night I received the [2004] wet and reckless I was not 

supposed to be the driver. Unfortunately, the person I was 

with was incapacitated and my hand was forced when we 

3 

had to leave very suddenly. When I was pulled over on that 

foggy night, I blew a .04 [blood alcohol concentration] BAC 

according to the breathalyzer, which is under the legal limit, 

but because I was only 20 years old and not quite legal 

drinking age, I was arrested that night. The DUI in 2009 was 

also a mixture of bad luck and a less than wise decision to 

drive. I had a friend who had zero drinks with me that night 

but the thought never occurred to me to have him drive 

because I did not feel intoxicated. That night I blew a .08 

BAC according to the breathalyzer, which is exactly the legal 

limit. Since that night in 2009, I made the decision never to 

drive no matter how little I may have had to drink.

FAILURE TO DISCLOSE CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS

7. 

On December 4, 2019, respondent electronically submitted an 

application for a certificate of clearance. By submitting the application, respondent 

swore or affirmed under penalty of perjury that the information contained in the 

application is true and correct. In response to the question in the application of 

whether respondent had “ever been convicted of any felony or misdemeanor in 

California or any other place” respondent answered in the affirmative. Respondent 

then disclosed only his 2009 DUI conviction.

8.

Respondent’s September 24, 2020 letter to the Committee provides his 

explanation regarding his failure to disclose two of his three convictions, as follows: 

The intent and purpose of this letter, first and foremost, is 

to assure the [C]ommittee that the omission of any 

4 

paperwork related to any past misconduct was a gross 

oversight. I recognize my mistake and take full 

responsibility for it, though it was not intentional. It was 

never my intention to fool or mislead the Committee as I 

am well aware of what is on my record and that a 

background check via fingerprint would show the incidents 

on my report. At the time of sending my application I 

believed I was saving, not sending. As my correspondence 

with one of your Staff Services Analyst[s] Mr. Marc 

Malaspino will show, I was fully cooperative when I was 

made aware of this mistake, I then proceeded to get all the 

missing paperwork in as fast as I could. 

Respondent’s Evidence 

RESPONDENT’S TESTIMONY 

9. 

Respondent is 38 years old. He grew up in Sacramento, and graduated 

from Hiram Johnson High School in 2002. From 2002 through 2008 he worked with 

students in after school programs through the Sacramento Department of Recreation. 

10. 

Respondent began working for the Sacramento Unified School District in 

2013 as a custodian. In 2016, respondent was promoted to the position of plant 

manager at Washington Elementary School in Sacramento. He is responsible for 

maintaining the school facilities. He also helps supervise children in the cafeteria and 

has regular interactions with teachers and school administrators. Respondent has 

never been accused of misconduct in his employment with the schools. 

5 

11. 

Respondent does not “remember a whole lot” about the events leading 

to his 2015 arrest and conviction. He was at a bachelor party for a friend, and he drank 

too much hard liquor too fast. He recalls that he was crying and apologetic after he 

was taken to jail. He characterizes the events as “one of the worst nights of my life.” As 

a result of the conviction, the court imposed a fine of approximately $1,000, which he 

paid. The court did not impose probation. Respondent accepts full responsibility for 

his conduct. 

12.  With respect to the 2009 DUI conviction, respondent recalls that he was 

out with a friend playing poker in downtown Sacramento. When it came time to leave 

he did not feel “buzzed” so he did not ask anyone else to drive. He was pulled over for 

a traffic violation and submitted to a breathalyzer test which showed he had a BAC of 

0.08. Respondent accepts full responsibility for his conduct. 

13.  With respect to the 2004 wet reckless conviction, respondent was with 

friends “drinking and having a good time.” He was driving his friend’s car because his 

friend was too intoxicated. He was pulled over by law enforcement and submitted to a 

breathalyzer test which showed a BAC of 0.04. He accepts full responsibility for his 

conduct. 

14.

Respondent is not a heavy drinker. He made a “big mistake” by drinking 

hard alcohol too fast at the 2015 bachelor party. He drank to the point of “blacking 

out” on that occasion. He has not done that before or since.

15. 

Respondent currently drinks beer at home or at his brother’s house once 

every month or two. He and his brother drink a little more beer during football season 

while watching games on television. He typically drinks approximately three or four 

beers throughout a game. His wife drives him home afterward. 

6 

16. 

Respondent has not sought treatment for possible alcohol abuse, other 

than as required by the court following his 2009 DUI conviction. Respondent drinks 

beer in moderation, and does not feel he has an alcohol problem. Nobody has ever 

expressed to him any concern that he might have a problem with alcohol or anger 

management.

17. 

The Sacramento Office of Education provides grants to classified 

employees to help them obtain the credentials necessary to join the teaching 

profession. Respondent participated in this opportunity and earned a bachelor’s

degree from Brandman University in 2019. 

18. 

Respondent averred that he “unintentionally” forgot to disclose his 2004 

and 2015 convictions when he submitted his application for a certificate of clearance. 

He submitted the application online and at night when he was tired. He has no other 

explanation for his failure to disclose his 2004 and 2015 convictions. 

LETTERS OF SUPPORT

19. 

Respondent submitted six letters of support from individuals who know 

him through his work in the schools. All of the authors have observed respondent in 

his work, and speak highly of him as a person and his commitment to the mission of 

educating children. They highly recommend respondent, without reservation, as a 

potential member of the teaching profession. Four of the letters of support accept and 

are partially based on respondent’s assertion that he accidentally failed to disclose two 

of his three convictions. 

7 

Discussion 

20.

The evidence is clear based on respondent’s convictions that he had a 

problem with alcohol abuse during the 11 years between 2004 and 2015. The evidence 

did not, however, establish that respondent currently has a problem with alcohol or 

any other intoxicating substance. Rather, the evidence established that respondent 

drinks alcohol occasionally and responsibly. There is very little chance he will return to 

irresponsible or abusive alcohol consumption. 

21.

Respondent testified that he submitted his application online and at 

night, and that his failure to disclose his 2004 and 2015 convictions in his application 

was “unintentional.” Respondent’s September 24, 2020 letter to the Committee states: 

“At the time of sending my application I believed I was saving, not sending.” 

Respondent did not address this purported mistake of “saving” versus “sending” 

during his testimony or in any other writing.

22. 

Respondent’s September 24, 2020 letter to the Committee also states: 

“As my correspondence with one of your Staff Services Analyst[s] . . . will show, I was 

fully cooperative when I was made aware of the mistake . . . .” Respondent did not 

introduce the correspondence showing his cooperation.

23.

Respondent recalls his 2004, 2009, and 2015 convictions. Although he 

does not recall many of the events leading to his 2015 conviction, he knows he was 

convicted. He described the night of his arrest in 2015 as “the worst night of my life.” 

For these reasons, it is highly unlikely respondent forgot his 2015 conviction when he 

listed his convictions in his application for a certificate of clearance. 

24.

There is no credible reason to believe that respondent simply forgot his 

2004 and 2015 convictions when he submitted his application. Nor did respondent 

8 

provide credible evidence that he made a mistake of “sending” versus “saving” his 

application. Based on the evidence as a whole, the only reasonable finding is that 

respondent intentionally chose not to disclose his 2004 and 2015 convictions. In doing 

so, respondent attempted a material deception in his application. 

25. 

It is clear that respondent keenly desires to work as a public school 

teacher. Respondent has taken substantial steps toward his stated goal. Respondent 

severely undercut his efforts by submitting an application under penalty of perjury in 

which he intentionally failed to disclose two of his three misdemeanor convictions. 

26. 

Teaching is a profession that requires a high level of integrity of those 

who seek to be credentialed. Respondent cannot reasonably expect to enter the 

teaching profession until he submits a clean application. For these reasons, 

respondent’s application must be denied. In the event respondent remains interested 

in entering the teaching profession, he is encouraged to submit a full and complete 

application when he is eligible to do so. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

In response to the Statement of Issues, respondent has the burden of 

proving by a preponderance of the evidence that he is entitled to the credential he 

seeks. (

 (2000) 81 Cal.App.4th 1205; 

 (2006) 139 Cal.App.4th 471, 476.) 

Preponderance of the evidence means “more likely than not.” (

(2002) 94 Cal.App.4th 1378, 1388.) 

2. 

Education Code section 44345 provides in part: 

9 

The commission may deny any application for the issuance 

of a credential or for the renewal of a credential made by 

any applicant who falls under any of the following 

categories: 

[¶] . . . [¶] 

(c) Is addicted to the use of intoxicating beverages to 

excess.

[¶] . . . [¶] 

(e) Has committed any act involving moral turpitude. 

[¶] . . . [¶] 

(g) Has intentionally practiced or attempted to practice any 

material deception or fraud in his or her application. 

[¶] . . . [¶] 

Any denial pursuant to subdivisions (a) to (e), inclusive, shall 

be based upon reasons related to the applicant’s fitness to 

teach or fitness to perform other duties for which that 

applicant is certificated, or competence to perform the 

duties which the credential would authorize the applicant to 

perform. 

3. 

The Commission has set forth the following factors to consider in 

determining whether there is a relationship between the alleged misconduct and the 

applicant’s fitness to teach, as follows: (1) the extent to which respondent’s conduct 

10 

has adversely affected students, fellow teachers, or the educational community; (2) the 

proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct; (3) the type of certificate held or 

applied for by respondent; (4) the extenuating or aggravating circumstances of the 

conduct; (5) the praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the 

conduct; (6) the probability that the misconduct will recur; (7) the extent to which 

disciplinary action may inflict an adverse impact or chilling effect upon the 

constitutional rights of respondent or other certificated persons; and (8) the publicity 

or notoriety given to the conduct. (California Code of Regulations (CCR), title 5, section 

80302.) These factors, hereinafter referred to as the 

factors, were initially 

developed by the California Supreme Court in 

(1969) 1 Cal.3d 214 (

). 

Allegation of Addiction to Intoxicating Beverages 

4. 

Complainant alleged based on respondent’s convictions that he is 

addicted to the use of intoxicating beverages, and that his application is subject to 

denial pursuant to Education Code section 44345, subdivision (c). The evidence is clear 

based on respondent’s convictions that he had a problem with alcohol abuse during 

the years of 2004 through 2015. However, the evidence did not establish that 

respondent currently has an alcohol problem or is addicted to the excessive use of 

intoxicating beverages. For these reasons, and based on the Factual Findings and Legal 

Conclusions as a whole, complainant did not establish cause to deny respondent’s 

application pursuant to Education Code section 44345, subdivision (c).

Allegation that Respondent Attempted a Material Deception 

5. 

Complainant alleged based on respondent’s failure to disclose his 2004 

and 2015 convictions in his application that his application is subject to denial 

11 

 
pursuant to Education Code section 44345, subdivision (g). The evidence established 

that respondent attempted a material deception when he failed to disclose his 2004 

and 2015 convictions in his application. For these reasons, and based on the Factual 

Findings and Legal Conclusions as a whole, complainant established cause to deny 

respondent’s application pursuant to Education Code section 44345, subdivision (g).

Allegations of Moral Turpitude 

6. 

Complainant alleged that respondent’s application is subject to denial 

pursuant to Education Code section 44345, subdivision (e), based on his misdemeanor 

convictions, his conduct underlying those convictions, and his failure to disclose his 

2004 and 2015 convictions in his application. 

7.

The California Supreme Court stated the following in the case of 

 (1990) 52 Cal.3d 487, 494: 

Conviction of some crimes establishes moral turpitude per 

se. These include crimes involving an intent to defraud as 

well as extremely repugnant crimes such as murder. 

[Citations.] Convictions for drunk driving [Fn. Omitted], 

however, do not per se establish moral turpitude. Therefore 

if moral turpitude exists in this case, it must be based on 

the particular circumstances surrounding the convictions.

8. 

The circumstances underlying respondent’s convictions in 2004 (wet 

reckless) and 2009 (DUI) did not demonstrate moral turpitude. With respect to 

respondent’s 2015 conviction for disorderly conduct, complainant did not present 

evidence sufficient to establish that respondent committed acts of moral turpitude. For 

these reasons, and based on the Factual Findings and Legal Conclusions as a whole, 

12 

complainant did not establish cause to deny respondent’s application pursuant to 

Education Code section 44345, subdivision (e), based on his misdemeanor convictions.

9. 

With respect to respondent’s failure to disclose his 2004 and 2015 

convictions in his application, respondent attempted to commit a material deception 

and in doing so committed a dishonest act. Moral turpitude has been defined by the 

courts to include dishonesty, even if not a criminal act. Specifically, moral turpitude has 

been described as “any crime or misconduct committed without excuse, or any 

‘dishonest or immoral’ act not necessarily a crime.” (

(1990) 224 Cal.App.3d 1016, 1027.) Respondent committed an act involving 

moral turpitude when he failed to disclose his 2004 and 2015 misdemeanor 

convictions in his application. For these reasons, and based on the Factual Findings 

and Legal Conclusions as a whole, complainant established cause to deny 

respondent’s application pursuant to Education Code section 44345, subdivision (e), 

subject to analysis under the 

 factors set forth in CCR, title 5, section 80302. 

Application of 

 Factors to Respondent’s Conduct Involving 

Moral Turpitude 

10. 

Respondent’s misconduct in failing to disclose his 2004 and 2015 

misdemeanor convictions in his application are considered under the 

factors, 

as set forth below. (1) Respondent’s conduct adversely affected the educational 

community in that his dishonest application subverted the credentialing process. (2) 

Respondent’s misconduct is more proximate than remote in time in that he submitted 

his dishonest application in December 2019. (3) Respondent applied for a credential 

that would have put him in direct contact with students. (4) Respondent’s conduct is 

aggravated by the fact that it includes dishonesty. CCR, title 5, section 80300, 

subdivision (b), lists aggravating factors including dishonesty. (5) Respondent’s 

13 

misconduct is entirely blameworthy, and is not praiseworthy in any respect. (6) 

Respondent is unlikely to again engage in the same or similar misconduct. (7) 

Disciplinary action or the denial of respondent’s application will not have an adverse 

impact or chilling effect upon the constitutional rights of respondent or any other 

person. (8) There is no evidence that there has been any publicity or notoriety 

regarding respondent’s misconduct.

11.

Based on the foregoing consideration of respondent’s conduct in relation 

to the 

factors, respondent’s misconduct in failing to disclose his 2004 and 

2015 misdemeanor convictions is substantially related to his fitness to serve as a 

teacher. For these reasons, and based on the Factual Findings and Legal Conclusions 

as a whole, respondent’s application must be denied.

ORDER

Respondent Matthew Francis Wood’s application for a Certificate of Clearance is 

DENIED.

DATE: March 7, 2022

TIMOTHY J. ASPINWALL

Administrative Law Judge

Office of Administrative Hearings

14

