BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Accusation and Statement of Issues 

Against: 

RENEE GUSTAVO VILLA, Respondent 

Case No. 1-673922970 

OAH No. 2021030910 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Marcie Larson, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings 

(OAH), State of California, heard this matter telephonically and by video conference on 

August 9, 2021, from Sacramento, California. 

Malissa Siemantel, Deputy Attorney General, represented complainant Mary 

Vixie Sandy, Ed.D., Executive Director of the California Commission on Teacher 

Credentialing (Commission), State of California. 

Mathew Martinez, Attorney at Law, represented respondent Renee Gustavo Villa

who appeared at the hearing.

on August 9, 2021.

Evidence was received, the record closed, and the matter submitted for decision 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Jurisdictional Matters 

1.

On December 10, 2012, the Commission issued respondent a Clear Pupil 

Personnel Services Credential (Pupil Personnel Credential), which expired on January 1, 

2 

On or about December 10, 2012, the Commission issued respondent a 

One-Year Non-Renewable Personnel Services Credential, which expired on January 1, 

2018. 

2018. 

3. 

On January 15, 2015, the Commission issued respondent a Preliminary 

Administrative Services Credential (Administrative Credential), which expired on 

January 1, 2018. 

4.

On December 24, 2018, the Commission received an application from 

respondent for a renewal of his Administrative Credential (Administrative Credential 

Application). The same day, the Commission received an application from respondent 

for a renewal of his Pupil Personnel Credential (Pupil Personnel Credential Application).  

5.

By letter dated August 27, 2020, Gilberto Gonzales, Staff Services Manger 

III for the Commission’s Division of Professional Practices, informed respondent that 

the Commission found probable cause to revoke his teaching credentials and all other 

certification documents and to deny his applications. The Commission determined that 

in 2000 respondent was convicted of theft and in 2018, he was convicted of battery. 

Respondent failed to disclose these convictions on his applications. Respondent was 

informed of his right to challenge the Commission’s decision and request a hearing.

Respondent timely requested a hearing.

2

6. 

On February 18, 2021, complainant, acting in her official capacity, signed 

and thereafter filed the Accusation and Statement of Issues. Complainant seeks to 

deny respondent’s applications, and revoke all credentials, certificates, and 

authorizations issued to respondent, based on allegations that he has been convicted 

of crimes and his failure to disclose his convictions on his applications. 

7. 

The matter was set for an evidentiary hearing before an Administrative 

Law Judge of the OAH, an independent adjudicative agency of the State of California, 

pursuant to Government Code section 11500 et seq. 

Criminal Convictions 

8. 

On or about February 25, 2000, in the Superior Court of California, 

County of Santa Barbara, respondent was convicted of petty theft, a violation of Penal 

Code section 484, subdivision (a), a misdemeanor. Imposition of sentence was 

suspended. Respondent was placed on unsupervised probation for two years. He was 

ordered to serve five days in jail. Respondent was also ordered to pay restitution, fines,

and fees. On February 5, 2003, respondent’s conviction was dismissed pursuant to 

Penal Code section 1203.4. 

9.

The circumstances underlying the conviction occurred on January 26, 

2000, at a Kmart in Santa Barbara County. Respondent was observed by a Kmart Loss 

Control Officer leaving the store with merchandise without paying. The employee 

stopped respondent while he was in the parking lot and requested that he return to 

the store. Respondent had $211.41 worth of unpaid merchandise. The employee 

contacted the Sheriff’s Department to report the theft.  

A Deputy arrived and questioned respondent about his conduct. Respondent 

informed the Deputy that he had “dyslexia” and “forgot to pay for it.” He also told the 

3

Deputy that he wanted to get caught “because [he was a] Criminal Justice student and 

[he] wanted to see how the system works.” Respondent also stated that he was “willing 

to pay for the merchandise that he had taken, but then changed his mind because the 

loss control officer was rude to him.” Respondent asserted that he had the money to 

pay for the items. However, when searched, the Deputy found that respondent only 

had $8 in his wallet.  

10.  On or about September 6, 2018, in the Superior Court of California, 

County of Monterey, respondent was convicted, on his plea of no contest, of battery, a 

violation of Penal Code section 242, a misdemeanor. Imposition of sentence was 

suspended. Respondent was placed on three years of informal probation. Respondent 

was ordered to attend weekly Alcoholic Anonymous (AA) or Narcotic Anonymous (NA) 

meetings for one year. Upon completion of the requirement, respondent’s plea would 

be withdrawn, and his charge would be dismissed. Respondent was also ordered to 

pay the victim $13,727 in restitution and pay the court fines and fees. No evidence was 

submitted demonstrating respondent’s plea was dismissed. 

11. 

The circumstances underlying the conviction occurred on October 31, 

2017. Officers from the City of Salinas Police Department were dispatched to BJ’s 

Restaurant in Salinas, California, to investigate an alleged battery of a waitress by a 

customer. Upon arriving an officer spoke to a waitress who alleged respondent 

assaulted her in the restaurant. She provided a description of respondent. The officer 

observed respondent in the driver side of a vehicle that was backing out of the parking 

lot. The officer conducted a traffic stop of the vehicle to prevent respondent from 

leaving. The officer then waited for another officer to arrive.  

When the second officer arrived, both approached respondent, who was seated 

in the driver seat of the vehicle. An officer informed respondent that they were 

4

investigating a crime that may have occurred inside the restaurant and that the officer 

was informed respondent was involved. The officer asked for respondent’s 

identification. Respondent stated that he did not have his driver’s license with him, but 

he provided the officer with a name and date of birth. 

One of the officers went back into the restaurant and obtained further 

information from the alleged victim. She informed the officer that respondent grabbed 

her breast and attempted to kiss her when she was serving customers at another table. 

She requested respondent be charged for his conduct. The officer returned outside to 

speak with respondent. The officer also conducted a Department of Motor Vehicle 

(DMV) record check and found that the name given by respondent required the 

person to have an interlock device on his vehicle. The officer did not observe an 

interlock device on respondent’s vehicle. The DMV photo for the name of the person 

and date of birth respondent provided the officers also did not match respondent’s 

appearance. As a result, the officers asked respondent to exit his vehicle.  

While seated on a curb, respondent stated that he “may have hugged her but 

she was flirting with [him],” referring to the waitress. The officer searched respondent 

for valid identification. The officer found an expired driver’s license in respondent’s 

pocket with his name, photo, and date of birth. The officer also found a photo 

identification card depicting respondent as the Vice Principal of Gonzales High School. 

The officer conducted another DMV search and found that respondent’s driver’s 

license had been suspended. The officer placed respondent under arrest.  

The officer conducted a further search of respondent and found a “small plastic 

bindle of a white powdery substance” in respondent’s “right coin jeans pocket.” 

Respondent told the officer it was baking soda. However, later testing confirmed the 

substance was cocaine. Respondent also again stated that he hugged the victim “but 

5

felt that she was flirting with him so she wanted to be hugged.” Respondent admitted 

to the officer that he originally gave the name and birth date of his twin brother to 

“hopefully get himself out of trouble.” Respondent was transported to jail.

Applications 

12.

On December 24, 2018, the Commission received an application from 

respondent for a renewal of his Administrative Credential. On or about December 15, 

2018, respondent certified under penalty of perjury to the truthfulness of all 

statements, answers, and representations contained in the Administrative Credential 

Application. 

13.  On December 24, 2018, the Commission received an application from 

respondent for a renewal of his Pupil Personnel Credential. On or about December 18, 

2018, respondent certified under penalty of perjury to the truthfulness of all 

statements, answers, and representations contained in the Pupil Personnel Credential 

Application. 

the following question: 

14.   Both applications’ section 4b required respondent to answer yes or no to 

Have you ever been convicted of any felony or 

misdemeanor in California or any other place? 

You must disclose: 

• all criminal convictions 

• misdemeanors and felonies convictions based on a plea of 

no contest or nolo contendere 

6

• convictions dismissed pursuant to Penal Code Section 

1203.4 

convictions 

• driving under the influence (DUI) or reckless driving 

• no matter how much time has passed

15. 

Respondent checked the “No” box in response to this question on both 

the Administrative Credential Application and Pupil Personnel Credential Application. 

Respondent’s Evidence 

16. 

Respondent explained that his 2000 conviction for petty theft served as a 

turning point in his life. After his conviction, respondent returned to school. He joined 

the seminary and completed a master’s program. He worked as an Army chaplain. 

Respondent thought the difficult parts of his life were over. However, he began using 

alcohol in 2016 and drugs in 2017, to cope with marital issues. At the time of his arrest 

in 2017, he was going through the most difficult time of his life. He and his wife of ten 

years separated. Respondent was abusing drugs and alcohol. After respondent’s arrest, 

respondent’s wife divorced him and he thought he would lose custody of his two 

children. Respondent explained that he was self-destructive and was not motivated.  

17. 

In August 2018, as part of respondent’s criminal plea agreement, he 

began attending Celebrate Recovery classes one day per week. However, he continued 

to use drugs and alcohol. Respondent explained he stopped using drugs 392 days ago. 

He stopped using alcohol 133 days ago. On April 28, 2021, respondent completed 30 

sessions of an Intensive Outpatient Program through Celebrate Recovery. He also 

attended therapy. 

7

18.

Respondent maintains his sobriety by attending AA meetings and church, 

communicating with his sponsor, and through the support of his family. In November 

2020, respondent married Xochitl Perez. He explained that his wife, whom he has 

known since he was a child, is an important part of his support system. Respondent is 

also actively involved in raising his children. 

19. 

Respondent was fired from his job with Gonzales High School in 2017, 

after his arrest. Prior to his position at Gonzales High School, respondent had worked 

in various positions as an educator and administrator. At the start of his career, 

respondent worked as an after-school mentor while obtaining his Bachelor of Arts 

degree. Respondent then worked as a history and Spanish teacher. In 2009, he 

completed his Master’s degree in School Counseling. He then worked as a Program 

Coordinator at Le Grand High School. In 2011, respondent earned his Education 

Specialist degree and began working as an academic counselor. He then moved into 

administrative positions at several schools. 

20. 

Respondent is currently working for his family dairy. Respondent 

explained that teaching and working with students is his passion. He would like to 

return to the profession. Respondent has completed continuing education to stay 

current on student issues. Respondent admitted that he lied on his applications. He 

did so because he was “ashamed and did not know how to handle the situation.” 

Respondent did not want to “face the facts” of what was going on in his life. 

CHARACTER EVIDENCE 

testified on respondent’s behalf:  

21. 

Respondent submitted several character letters and four family members 

8

22.

Respondent’s wife Xochitl Perez Villa testified and wrote a letter in 

support of respondent. Mrs. Villa has known respondent since they were children. They 

lost touch and then re-connected in 2017. Mrs. Villa explained that when respondent 

was going through his divorce, he was depressed. Respondent attended therapy and 

eventually began to put his life back together. Mrs. Villa explained that respondent is a 

different person now. He attends church and is very involved with his family and 

children. 

applications.   

Respondent told Mrs. Villa about his petty theft and battery convictions. 

Respondent explained to Mrs. Villa that he had only “tapped” the waitress on her 

shoulder. Respondent did not tell Mrs. Villa that he provided false information on his 

23. 

Richard Perez testified at hearing and wrote a letter supporting 

respondent. Mr. Perez is respondent’s uncle. Mr. Perez is a retired educator and 

principal. Respondent worked for Mr. Perez at Harmony Elementary School when Mr. 

Perez was the principal of the school. Mr. Perez described respondent as a person with 

a kind heart and good character. Mr. Perez was also impressed with the level of 

commitment respondent showed to his students.  

Mr. Perez is aware of the difficulties respondent had with drugs and alcohol 

during his divorce. He counseled respondent and advised him to get help. Mr. Perez 

noticed an improvement in respondent’s personality after he received treatment. Mr. 

Perez also explained that respondent is very remorseful for his past alcohol and drug 

use. Respondent is working hard to overcome his past challenges. Mr. Perez did not 

know about respondent’s convictions or that he provided false information on his 

applications to the Commission.  

9

24. 

Jorge Perez testified at hearing and wrote a letter supporting respondent. 

Mr. Perez is also respondent’s uncle. Mr. Perez owns Merced Dairy Distribution, Inc. He 

has employed respondent for the past three years. Mr. Perez described respondent as 

a hardworking person who is kind and thoughtful. Mr. Perez observed that respondent 

had a difficult time coping with his divorce. He is aware respondent began using drugs 

and alcohol. However, respondent got help and is now a “very responsible worker and 

father.” 

Mr. Perez is aware of respondent’s convictions. Respondent told Mr. Perez that 

he had “accidentally hugged a waitress.” Within the last year, respondent also told Mr. 

Perez that he was not truthful on the applications he submitted to the Commission.  

25. 

Stacey Hughes testified at hearing and wrote a letter supporting 

respondent. Ms. Hughes is respondent’s sister. She works for Merced Union School 

District. Ms. Hughes explained that respondent was the first person in their family of 

six children to graduate from college and went on to be a successful chaplain, start his 

own ministry, and volunteer for various community organizations. She explained that 

respondent went through a difficult period during his divorce. Ms. Hughes advised 

respondent to get help with his substance abuse issues. Since respondent attended a 

recovery program, he is more positive and involved with his family. 

Ms. Hughes is aware that respondent had “legal troubles.” He did not share the 

details with Ms. Hughes. Respondent did not tell Ms. Hughes he was convicted of 

battery. He also did not tell Ms. Hughes he provided false information on his 

applications to the Commission.  

26. 

Respondent submitted an employee evaluation from Patterson Unified 

School District and letters of recommendation from previous employers all dated in 

10

2018. The letters describe respondent as a hard-working and dedicated educator. The 

letters appear to be written in support of respondent finding new employment. 

Analysis 

27. 

In 

(1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, the California 

Supreme Court concluded that a teaching credential cannot be disciplined for immoral 

conduct, unprofessional conduct, or conduct involving moral turpitude “unless that 

conduct indicates that the [educator] is unfit to teach.” (

. at p. 229.) The Court 

outlined factors to consider when determining whether an educator’s conduct 

demonstrates unfitness to teach, which have been codified in California Code of 

Regulations, title 5, section 80302, subdivision (a). The factors are:  

(1) the likelihood that the conduct may have adversely 

affected students or fellow teachers, and the degree of such 

adversity anticipated;  

(2) the proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct;  

(3) the types of credentials held or sought by the person 

involved; 

(4) any extenuating or aggravating circumstances 

surrounding the conduct;  

(5) the praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives 

resulting in the conduct; 

(6) the likelihood of recurrence of the questioned conduct; 

11

(7) the extent to which disciplinary action may have an 

adverse impact or chilling effect upon the constitutional 

rights of the person involved, or other teachers; and  

(8) the publicity or notoriety given to the conduct.

LIKELIHOOD OF ADVERSE EFFECTS ON STUDENTS OR FELLOW TEACHERS

28. 

Respondent’s convictions and the underlying acts of petty theft and 

battery, along with providing the Commission false information about those 

convictions, demonstrates poor judgment, dishonesty, and is a negative example for 

students and fellow teachers. As an educator, respondent is expected to set a good 

example and be a positive role model who abides by the law. He is expected to 

exercise good judgment. Respondent failed to do so and the potential for adverse 

effects on students and his fellow teachers was significant. 

PROXIMITY OR REMOTENESS IN TIME 

29. 

Respondent’s most recent conviction and conduct providing false 

information to the Commission occurred in 2018. Respondent contends his conduct 

was a result of his alcohol and drug abuse. He has been sober for just over one year. 

His criminal probation is not scheduled to end until September 2021. Respondent’s 

misconduct is more proximate than remote in time. 

TYPES OF CREDENTIALS HELD AND SOUGHT

30. 

Respondent held a Pupil Personnel Credential and Administrative 

Credential, both of which he is seeking to have renewed. The credentials respondent 

held and is seeking to renew require both teaching competence and administration of 

school functions.  

12

EXTENUATING OR AGGRAVATING CIRCUMSTANCES 

31.

Neither the Education Code nor the applicable regulations specify what 

constitutes “extenuating circumstances.” However, California Code of Regulations, title 

5, section 80300, subdivision (m), defines “mitigating factor” as “an event or 

circumstance which demonstrates that the public, school children and the profession 

would be adequately protected by a more lenient degree of adverse action or no 

adverse action whatsoever.” Respondent presented mitigating evidence of the 

emotional struggles he was experiencing as a result of his marriage difficulties and 

subsequent efforts to address his substance abuse. 

32. 

California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80300, subdivision (b), lists 

aggravating factors, the presence of which indicate a greater degree of discipline is 

necessary to protect students and the teaching profession. These factors include, in 

pertinent part: (1) the misconduct in question involved multiple wrongful acts; and (2) 

the misconduct significantly harmed the educational system. Respondent’s misconduct 

involved multiple wrongful acts including two criminal convictions and knowingly 

providing false information on two applications he submitted to the Commission. 

Respondent also minimized his criminal conduct and has not been forthcoming with 

those who support him about his conduct. Weighing the evidence, the aggravating 

circumstances outweigh the extenuating or mitigating circumstances. 

PRAISEWORTHINESS OR BLAMEWORTHINESS OF MOTIVES RESULTING IN THE 

MISCONDUCT 

33. 

Respondent’s motives for the conduct underlying his convictions is 

unclear. Respondent failed to provide any insight into why he stole from Kmart. 

Additionally, although respondent pled no contest to battery, he has consistently tried 

13

to minimize his conduct. Additionally, respondent lied on his applications because he 

did not want to address his behavior. There is nothing praiseworthy about 

respondent’s conduct.  

LIKELIHOOD OF RECURRENCE 

34.

Respondent is still early in his recovery from drug and alcohol abuse. He 

has not developed significant insight into or taken responsibility for his conduct. 

Respondent has not been honest with his family about his convictions or his 

dishonesty to the Commission. While respondent had engaged in some treatment, 

respondent did not present sufficient evidence to demonstrate that he is unlikely to 

engage in future misconduct.

ADVERSE IMPACT OR CHILLING EFFECT  

35. 

There is no evidence that discipline would adversely impact or chill 

respondent or any other teacher in the free exercise of their constitutional rights.

PUBLICITY OR NOTORIETY OF MISCONDUCT 

36.  No evidence was presented that respondent’s conduct was either 

publicized or notorious. 

CONCLUSION 

37. 

For the reasons stated above, and considering all the 

 factors, 

complainant established by clear and convincing evidence that cause exists to 

discipline respondent. Based on the evidence, it would not be consistent with the 

public interest to allow respondent to retain his existing credentials or to renew his 

credentials at this time.  

14

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

Burden of Proof 

1.

Complainant has the burden of proving the allegations in the Accusation 

by clear and convincing evidence to a reasonable certainty. (

 (1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035.) Clear and convincing evidence 

requires proof that is so clear as to leave no substantial doubt and that is sufficiently 

strong to command the unhesitating assent of every reasonable mind. (

 (2008) 169 Cal.App.4th 176, 190.) 

2. 

Concerning the Statement of Issues, respondent has the burden of 

proving by a preponderance of the evidence that he is entitled to the credentials he 

seeks. (

 (2000) 81 Cal.App.4th 1205; 

Preponderance of the evidence means “more likely than not.” (

 (2006) 139 Cal.App.4th 471, 476.) 

(2002) 94 Cal.App.4th 1378, 1388.) 

Applicable Law 

3. 

Pursuant to the Education Code, commencing with section 44000, and 

California Code of Regulations, title 5, commencing with section 80000, the 

Commission is responsible for credentialing teachers in public schools in California, 

including issuing credentials and taking adverse action against applicants and 

credential holders.  

 

 

15

4. 

Education Code section 44345 provides in part: 

The commission may deny any application for the issuance 

of a credential or for the renewal of a credential made by 

any applicant who falls under any of the following 

categories: 

[¶] … [¶]

[¶] … [¶]

[¶] … [¶]

(e) Has committed any act involving moral turpitude. 

(g) Has intentionally practiced or attempted to practice any 

material deception or fraud in his or her application. 

Any denial pursuant to subdivisions (a) to (e), inclusive, shall 

be based upon reasons related to the applicant’s fitness to 

teach or fitness to perform other duties for which that 

applicant is certificated, or competence to perform the 

duties which the credential would authorize the applicant to 

perform. 

5. 

Education Code section 44440 provides: 

(a) No applicant who is under review by the commission 

shall be allowed to withdraw his or her application for a 

credential without the written consent of the commission. 

The commission shall retain its authority over those 

16

applicants to proceed with the denial of the credential upon 

any ground provided by law, or to enter an order denying 

the credential upon any ground provided by law. 

(b) The suspension or expiration of any credential, its 

surrender without the written consent of the commission, or 

a revocation pursuant to Section 44423 does not deprive 

the commission of its authority to do any of the following: 

(1) Institute or continue a disciplinary proceeding against 

the credential holder upon any ground provided by law. 

(2) Enter an order suspending or revoking the credential. 

(3) Issue a public reproval or private admonition to the 

credential holder.

6. 

Education Code section 44421 provides in part:  

The Commission on Teacher Credentialing shall privately 

admonish, publicly reprove, revoke or suspend for immoral 

or unprofessional conduct, or for persistent defiance of, and 

refusal to obey, the laws regulating the duties of persons 

serving in the public school system, or for any cause that 

would have warranted the denial of an application for a 

credential or the renewal thereof, or for evident unfitness 

for service.

17

7. 

California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 803000 states in part that:

(a) “Adverse action” is a denial, a private admonition, public 

reproval, suspension or a revocation of one or more 

credentials. 

(b) “Aggravating factor” is an event or circumstance which 

demonstrates that a greater degree of adverse action for an 

act of professional misconduct is needed to adequately 

protect the public, schoolchildren or the profession. 

Aggravating factors may include, but are not limited to, the 

following: 

[¶] … [¶] 

(2) that the misconduct evidences multiple acts of 

wrongdoing or demonstrate a pattern of misconduct; 

(3) that the misconduct was surrounded by or followed by 

bad faith, dishonesty or other violation of the laws 

governing educators;

[¶] … [¶] 

(c) “Applicant” is an individual applying for a credential, 

permit, waiver or other certification document issued by the 

Commission on Teacher Credentialing. 

8. 

As set forth in Factual Finding 27, California Code of Regulations, title 5, 

80302, subdivision (a), provides the factors to consider to “determine the relationship 

18

between the alleged misconduct and the applicant’s or holder’s fitness, competence, 

or ability to effectively perform the duties authorized by the credential.”  

9. 

The California Supreme Court has recognized that the terms “immoral 

conduct” and “unprofessional conduct” substantially overlap one another and conduct 

that constitutes one often includes the other. (

., 

, 1 

Cal.3d 214, 221, fn. 9.) “Unprofessional conduct” includes “‘that which violates the rules 

of ethical code of a profession or such conduct which is unbecoming a member of a 

profession in good standing.’” (

 

(1953) 41 Cal.2d 546, 553; quoting, 66 Corpus Juris, p. 55.) Additionally, in 

 (2011) 194 

Cal.App.4th 1454, the court explained: 

Moreover, the definition of immoral or unprofessional 

conduct must be considered in conjunction with the unique 

position of public school teachers, upon whom are imposed 

“responsibilities and limitations on freedom of action which 

do not exist in regard to other callings.” [Citation.] 

(

. at p. 1466.) 

in 

972: 

10.

Immoral conduct is sometimes considered as synonymous with 

“dishonesty” or a high degree of unfairness. (

(1960) 179 Cal.App.3d 808, 811.) The court explained 

 (1970) 9 Cal.App.3d 967, 

The term “immoral” has been defined as that which is 

hostile to the welfare of the general public and contrary to 

19

good morals. Immorality includes conduct inconsistent with 

rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, 

dissoluteness; or as willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct 

showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable 

members of the community, and as an inconsiderate 

attitude toward good order and the public welfare.  

11. 

“Evident unfitness for service” means a teacher is clearly not fit, not 

adapted to or unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of temperamental defects 

or inadequacies. (

 (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444.) “Unlike ‘unprofessional 

conduct,’ ‘evident unfitness for service’ connotes a fixed character trait, presumably 

not remediable merely on receipt of notice that one’s conduct fails to meet the 

expectations of the employing school district.” (

.) 

Cause for Discipline 

12. 

As set forth in the Factual Findings as a whole, complainant established 

by clear and convincing evidence that respondent committed acts of unprofessional 

conduct. Cause exists to discipline respondent’s credentials pursuant to Education 

Code section 44421.

13. 

As set forth in the Factual Findings as a whole, complainant established 

by clear and convincing evidence that respondent committed acts demonstrating 

evident unfitness for service. Cause exists to discipline respondent’s credentials 

pursuant to Education Code section 44421. 

14. 

As set forth in the Factual Findings as a whole, complainant established 

by clear and convincing evidence that respondent committed acts that consist of 

20

immoral conduct. Cause exists to discipline respondent’s credentials pursuant to 

Education Code section 44421.

15. 

As set forth in the Factual Findings as a whole, complainant established 

by clear and convincing evidence that respondent committed acts of moral turpitude.

Cause exists to discipline respondent’s credentials pursuant to Education Code 

sections 44421 and 44435, subdivision (e). 

16. 

As set forth in Factual Findings 12 through 15, complainant established 

by clear and convincing evidence that respondent practiced material deception or 

fraud in his applications. Cause exists to discipline respondent’s credentials pursuant 

to Education Code sections 44421 and 44345, subdivision (g). 

Cause for Denial 

17. 

As set forth in the Factual Findings as a whole, respondent committed 

acts of moral turpitude. Cause exists to deny respondent’s applications for renewal of 

his Clear Pupil Personnel Services Credential and Administrative Credential pursuant to 

Education Code section 44345, subdivision (e). 

18. 

As set forth in Factual Findings 12 through 15, respondent practiced 

material deception or fraud in his Clear Pupil Personnel Services Credential and 

Administrative Credential applications. Cause exists to deny respondent’s applications 

for renewal of his Clear Pupil Personnel Services Credential and Administrative 

Credential pursuant to Education Code sections 44421 and 44345, subdivision (g).

21

ORDER 

1.

All credentials, certificates, and authorizations issued to respondent 

Renee Gustavo Villa, including his Administrative Credential and Clear Pupil Personnel 

Services Credential, are REVOKED.

2. 

Respondent Renee Gustavo Villa’s application for renewal of his 

Administrative Credential is DENIED. 

3. 

Respondent Renee Gustavo Villa’s application for renewal of his Clear 

Pupil Personnel Services Credential is DENIED.

DATE: September 7, 2021

 

MARCIE LARSON 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings

 

22

