BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Accusation Against: 

OMAR AKRAM MUSLEH, Respondent 

Case No. 2-270787287 

OAH No. 2022080196 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Timothy J. Aspinwall, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative 

Hearings (OAH), State of California, heard this matter by videoconference on March 6 

and 7, 2023, from Sacramento, California. 

Brent O. Jex, Deputy Attorney General, represented Mary Vixie Sandy, Ed.D. 

(complainant), Executive Director of the California Commission on Teacher 

Credentialing (Commission). 

Ernest H. Tuttle, III, Attorney at Law, represented Omar Akram Musleh 

(respondent) who was present. 

Evidence was received, the record closed, and the matter submitted for decision 

on March 7, 2023. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Background and Jurisdictional Matters 

1. 

On June 1, 2018, the Commission issued a Clear Single Subject Teaching 

Credential (credential) to respondent. Respondent’s credential was in full force and 

effect at all times relevant and will expire on July 1, 2023, unless renewed. 

2. 

On July 1, 2022, complainant, acting in her official capacity, caused to be 

filed the Accusation in this matter. Complainant seeks to revoke all credentials, 

certificates, and authorizations issued to respondent, based on allegations that he 

engaged in conduct toward a high school student, NJ, that was unprofessional, 

immoral, involved moral turpitude, and displayed evident unfitness for service. The 

specific conduct alleged is that respondent: hugged NJ and told NJ he “loved” him; 

failed to refer NJ to a school counselor after NJ discussed past suicidal ideations and 

current feelings of stress and anxiety; used inappropriate or profane language; 

obtained NJ’s home address from a school counselor under false pretenses; sent food 

to NJ’s home address; asked NJ to bring him food; and texted NJ a screenshot of 

respondent’s resignation letter. Respondent timely filed a notice of defense, and this 

hearing followed. 

Complainant’s Evidence 

TESTIMONY OF ZACHARY BOSWELL 

3. 

Zachary Boswell has been employed since September 2022 by the Tracy 

Unified School District as the principal of Tracy Independent Charter School. Prior to 

that he worked as the vice principal and principal at West High School in Tracy, where 

2 

he participated in the hiring of respondent to serve as a physical education teacher 

and coach at West High School. 

4. 

Mr. Boswell met with NJ and his father on the last day of the 2020-21 

school year, at which time NJ made complaints about respondent.1 NJ was a well-

respected student on campus. Following their meeting, NJ sent Mr. Boswell an email 

dated May 27, 2021, with screenshots of numerous text messages between NJ and 

respondent. 

5. 

On June 4, 2021, Mr. Boswell and Tammy Jalique, associate 

superintendent of human resources, interviewed respondent, who had a union 

representative present. 

6. 

Mr. Boswell testified about selected portions of the interview, 

respondent’s statements during the interview, and his own opinions about 

respondent’s conduct, as set forth below. 

7. 

Respondent ordered pizza to be delivered to NJ’s address. In Mr. 

Boswell’s view, this alone would not necessarily be inappropriate. 

8. 

Respondent sent a text message to NJ stating “U gotta bring me some T4 

[a café] one day though . . . Thursday!” In Mr. Boswell’s view it is inappropriate for a 

teacher to ask a student for food or beverages. 

1 NJ also submitted a written statement about respondent. Because NJ did not 

testify, the written statement was admitted and considered as administrative hearsay 

only to supplement or explain other evidence pursuant to Government Code section 

11513, subdivision (d). 

3 

 
9. 

Respondent hugged NJ on one or two occasions. In Mr. Boswell’s view, it 

is not necessarily inappropriate for a teacher to hug a student. 

10. 

Respondent told NJ that he loved him. In Mr. Boswell’s view, it is 

inappropriately intimate for a teacher to tell the student that he loves him. 

11.  NJ told respondent he had suicidal feelings in the past. Respondent did 

not refer NJ for professional help or take other steps to ensure his safety. In Mr. 

Boswell’s view, this was extremely inappropriate. A teacher’s first responsibility is to 

keep students safe. The teacher should stay with the student and immediately call for 

appropriate help. 

12.  On cross-examination, Mr. Boswell acknowledged that respondent was 

“hard-working” and “doing a great job for us” prior to the complaint made by NJ. 

Respondent had the right to postpone their June 4, 2021 interview until the end of 

summer recess in August. Respondent did not insist on that and went ahead with the 

interview in June 2021. 

TESTIMONY OF TAMMY JALIQUE 

13.  Ms. Jalique is employed as the associate superintendent of human 

resources at Tracy Unified School District. She participated in the June 4, 2021, 

interview with Mr. Boswell, respondent, and respondent’s union representative. She is 

familiar with standards of conduct for teachers. Generally, teachers are required to 

maintain professional boundaries with students. 

14.  Ms. Jalique believes respondent violated professional boundaries by 

ordering pizza delivered to NJ’s home address, because, to her knowledge, NJ had not 

given respondent his home address. She also believes respondent violated 

4 

professional boundaries by hugging NJ. Ms. Jalique acknowledged on cross-

examination that occasionally teachers will give students a hug, but it is not something 

the District encourages or expects from teachers. 

15. 

In Ms. Jalique’s opinion, respondent violated professional boundaries by 

telling NJ he loved him. A better course of action would have been for respondent to 

refer NJ for professional help if there were concerns about his well-being. Finally, Ms. 

Jalique believes respondent violated professional boundaries by sharing a resignation 

letter with NJ. As an adult, it is not appropriate to share his employment status with a 

student. 

Respondent’s Evidence 

RESPONDENT’S TESTIMONY, WRITTEN STATEMENTS, AND TEXT MESSAGES 

16. 

Respondent testified at hearing and submitted two written statements. 

One is dated December 20, 2021, addressed to the Commission, and the other is 

addressed to “whom it may concern” and was received by the Commission on October 

8, 2021. Respondent’s testimony, written statements, and text messages upon which 

he was questioned at hearing are summarized below. 

17. 

Respondent is currently employed as a physical education teacher at 

Pioneer Elementary School, in Merced. Respondent’s teachers during his high school 

years were in an important influence in encouraging respondent to pursue athletics 

and education. Respondent’s leadership teacher in high school was particularly 

important in that she “went above and beyond” to support respondent through 

“tough times” by “lending an ear” when he needed to talk with someone. She also 

helped him get a job in the school cafeteria, which allowed him to eat and bring home 

money to help his family. Respondent decided to become a teacher because he loves 

5 

working with children and wanted to “give back” to students in the same way his 

teachers had helped him. 

18. 

Respondent began his college education at Merced Junior College where 

he earned an associate’s degree in physical education and played on the basketball 

team. Respondent then went on to California State University, Stanislaus (Cal State 

Stanislaus), where he earned a bachelor’s degree in kinesiology, a master’s degree in 

administrative services, and his teaching and administrative credentials. He graduated 

summa cum laude from both his bachelor’s and master’s programs. He has since 

accepted several invitations from his alma mater to speak with students interested in 

kinesiology and physical education. 

19. 

Respondent’s first job following graduation was at Patterson High 

School, in Patterson, where he served as a physical education/health intern teacher. 

Respondent began his career as a credentialed teacher at Johansen High School in 

Modesto, where he taught 21st century skills/health for two years. He then taught 

health for one year at Pitman High School in Turlock. Respondent did not encounter 

any problems with students or administrators at either school. 

20. 

In 2020, respondent began working as a physical education teacher at 

West High School in Tracy. During the spring of 2021, the school administration asked 

respondent to serve as the head coach of the girls’ varsity volleyball team, and to 

assist as needed with the boys’ varsity volleyball team. During this time, respondent 

got to know NJ, who was one of the leading players and the captain of the boys’ 

volleyball team. 

21.  Members of the boys’ volleyball team did not reliably check electronic 

postings of practice schedules and announcements. For this reason, with NJ’s consent, 

6 

respondent routed electronic messages to NJ, who then forwarded respondent’s 

messages to the rest of the team. Respondent found this was an effective way to 

communicate with the team. 

22.  NJ told respondent in a conversation before a game that he was having 

some challenges at home, and that he wanted respondent to mentor him and to help 

him develop self-discipline and accountability. For this reason, respondent started 

checking in with NJ via text messages regarding NJ’s schoolwork and how he was 

feeling emotionally. Respondent’s motive was to help NJ, and to demonstrate to NJ 

that he cared for and would listen to him. In this way, respondent hoped he could 

“give back” in a similar way to how teachers had helped him as a student. 

23. 

Respondent and NJ exchanged a series of text messages regarding plans 

for a ceremony to occur immediately prior to the final volleyball game of the season to 

honor the former volleyball coach who had recently passed away prematurely. The text 

messages regarding plans for the ceremony are set forth below: 

Respondent: I trust you . . . Come up with an idea [for the 

ceremony] and I’ll just roll with it[.] Fuck it[.] 

NJ: Maybe after reading the script about her you can let 

people who want to share a story . . . have a little speech? 

Respondent: [laughing emoji] . . . . No we don’t have time 

for that buddy . . . . 

24.  During the week preceding the final volleyball game of the season, NJ 

arrived late for team pictures, missed a practice without giving prior notice, and failed 

to provide reasons why he was late to practices including the final practice of the 

7 

season. Respondent recommended to the head boys’ volleyball coach that NJ not play 

the first set of a five-set match. Respondent felt this would help teach NJ 

“responsibility and accountability.” The head coach agreed with respondent’s 

recommendation and held NJ out during the first set. NJ was very upset with 

respondent about this. 

25. 

A few days after the game, respondent spoke with NJ outside at the high 

school quad. Respondent felt they had a good conversation and “cleared the air” 

about the fact that respondent had recommended holding NJ out of the first set of the 

previous match. Also, during this conversation, NJ told respondent that in the past he 

had some suicidal feelings. Respondent asked NJ if he had any “present” suicidal 

feelings or “a plan” to commit suicide. NJ answered “no” to both. Respondent did not 

feel NJ was at any risk at that time. Respondent was sensitive to issues of student 

suicidality because three students had committed suicide while he was teaching at 

Patterson High School. In hindsight, respondent now realizes he should have referred 

NJ to one of the other professionals at school to ensure NJ’s safety. 

26. 

Following respondent’s conversation with NJ in the high school quad, 

respondent exchanged text messages in which respondent told NJ that loves him. 

Respondent was not expressing “intimate feelings” toward NJ when he said that. The 

text message exchange dated May 1, 2021, is set forth below: 

Respondent: There are some conversations that are better 

to be between you and I . . . Those are the heart to heart 

conversations . . . 

I hope you continue to stay in touch and let me know how 

you’re doing in grades and stuff . . . I definitely want to see 

8 

you graduate and see you around the volleyball court at 

West . . . 

As always and I really mean this let me know if you ever 

need anything . . . I hope I’m making a positive difference[.] 

Love you [NJ] 

-Coach. 

NJ: I think it was good we had a conversation 1-1[.] In 

person[.] 

27. 

Respondent is not sure why he said in the text message that “some 

conversations are better to be between you and I.” Respondent hoped NJ would stay 

in touch, because graduates are welcome to come back and help coach the team. 

Respondent signed off with “Love you” to let NJ know he cares for him. Respondent 

was not expressing romantic affection for NJ. 

28. 

Two days later, on May 3, 2021, respondent and NJ exchanged text 

messages, as set forth below: 

Respondent: School is good? 

NJ: Yeah just stressed[.] I’m literally just focusing on 

school[.] 

Respondent: Don’t kill yourself . . . hang in there . . . get 

help if you need it . . . focus on balance . . . reach out . . . if 

you need help tell me[.] Meditate . . . I do it all the time! I 

9 

want to hear from you let me know how you’re doing each 

day . . . . 

NJ: I’m doing fine today but mainly just stressed w[ith] 

school[.] I’m just trying to graduate at this point[.] 

29. 

Respondent acknowledged on cross-examination that saying “don’t kill 

yourself” was a poor choice of words on his part, especially given that NJ had told 

respondent two days earlier about his past feelings of suicidality. Respondent was 

trying to encourage NJ not to be too hard on himself. 

30. 

Every year, each sport team is asked to nominate someone to be the 

athlete of the year. Respondent and another coach nominated NJ, and he was selected 

by a vote of varsity coaches to be awarded athlete of the year. To recognize the honor, 

respondent framed a team jersey , along with some photographs. Respondent thought 

this would be a nice way to recognize NJ’s efforts on the volleyball team. 

31. 

Initially, respondent intended to mail the framed jersey to NJ and 

obtained his mailing address from a school counselor for this purpose. Respondent 

found it would be too expensive to send by mail, and instead arranged to give the 

framed jersey to NJ in a school parking lot with an assistant principal nearby taking 

pictures. Respondent hugged NJ at that time. 

32.  On May 20, 2021, respondent exchanged a series of text messages with 

NJ about coming to pick up the framed jersey. The text messages are set forth below: 

Respondent: Are you coming to pick it up today[?] 

Respondent: ? Ur are terrible[.] 

10 

NJ: Dude I was actually focusing on classes today[.] I’ll come 

today what time? Plus I didn’t even get a notif[ication][.] 

Respondent: LOL . . . You’re such a bullshitter[.] 

NJ: Bro what[?] I don’t check notif[ications] if I’m not up[.] 

Okay that pisses me off that you think I’m bullshitting[.] 

Respondent: I’m kidding . . . relax! 

33. 

Respondent acknowledged that it is inappropriate for a high school 

teacher to call a student a “bullshitter.” Respondent was trying to emulate a high 

school aged person in his text message. 

34. 

Respondent understands that it was unprofessional of him to use 

profanity in text messages with NJ. He knows it was “poor judgment” and he is “not 

proud of it.” If he could go back in time, he would not do so again. 

35. 

The following day, on May 21, 2021, respondent ordered pizza delivered 

to NJ at his home because NJ had told respondent he had nothing to eat at home and 

was stressed about final exams. Respondent did not ask permission from NJ’s parents 

before he sent the pizza, because he did not feel he was doing anything wrong. 

36. 

Respondent never asked NJ to bring him food or beverages, other than 

in a joking manner in a text message exchange set forth below. Respondent did not 

intend his text message to be taken literally, because he was fasting for Ramadan and 

NJ knew that. 

Respondent: U gotta bring me some T4 one day tho . . . 

Thursday! 

11 

NJ: I’m broke[.] 

Respondent: LOL whatever . . . I’ll pay for both[.] Thanks for 

the nice gesture though I really appreciate it (100% 

sarcasm)[.] 

37. 

Respondent sent a text message to NJ with a “screenshot” of his draft 

resignation letter from his coaching position. Respondent sent the text message to NJ 

because NJ had made some very “harsh” comments about respondent’s coaching. 

Respondent quoted some words from one of NJ’s text messages, stating that 

respondent had “Fucked shit up.” Respondent now recognizes that he should have 

“known better” than to send the text message and draft resignation letter. The text 

message is set forth below: 

Respondent: Honestly [NJ] . . . . No . . . I’m not okay . . . 

But nobody has to worry about me fucking shit up anymore 

. . . I am not sending this [resignation letter] out yet because 

I am going to think about it for another night. 

But . . . Thank you [NJ] . . . thanks a lot . . . Maybe if you’re 

on campus tom[orrow] I’ll let you know what is going to 

happen[.] 

38. 

Respondent has learned a lot from his experiences at West High School. 

He knows he must keep in mind that he is a teacher and not a counselor. He knows 

that he needs to keep a more professional distance between himself and students. He 

believes one of the best ways to make a positive impact is to model good behavior, 

12 

and to maintain a high level of professionalism each day. He loves working as a 

teacher and hopes to continue his service as an educator for many years to come. 

TESTIMONY OF PAULETTE KEENEY  

39.  Ms. Keeney is currently employed as a physical education teacher and 

softball coach at Tracy High School, and has been employed by the Tracy Unified 

School District for approximately 18 years. During 2021, she also coached the varsity 

boys’ volleyball team at West High School. She knows respondent because he was at 

that time coaching the girls’ volleyball team and also assisted her with the boys’ team. 

She has not seen the Accusation in this matter. 

40. 

Prior to the final volleyball game of the season, respondent and Ms. 

Keeney spoke about NJ missing and “messing around” in practice. Respondent 

recommended to her that NJ not play in the first set of the five-set match. Ms. Keeney 

followed this recommendation as a normal type of discipline for NJ’s behavior. 

41.  Ms. Keeney never observed respondent behave or speak inappropriately 

toward the students. Ms. Keeney worked primarily at Tracy High School and did not 

have much opportunity to observe respondent. 

42.  Ms. Keeney loves coaching, and naturally spends a lot of time with team 

members. Coaches can develop mentoring relationships with student-athletes, but 

must also maintain professional boundaries. 

43.  Ms. Keeney has a practice of sending text messages to the team captain 

with the understanding that the team captain will forward the message to the entire 

team. It is important that the coach maintain a level of professionalism in text 

messages with the team captain. 

13 

44.  Ms. Keeney has never had food delivered to the home address of a 

student-athlete. This might be a breach of professional boundaries. 

SCHOOL DISTRICT EVALUATIONS 

45. 

Respondent submitted written performance evaluations from Johansen 

High School (2017-18 and 2018-19); West High School in Tracy (2020-21); and Pioneer 

Elementary School in Merced (2021). All the evaluations assessed respondent’s 

performance in six major areas consisting of subareas. The major areas include: (1) 

engaging and supporting all students in learning; (2) creating and maintaining an 

effective environment for learning; (3) understanding and organizing the subject of 

knowledge; (4) planning, designing and delivering learning experiences for all 

students; (5) assessing student learning; and (6) developing as a professional. 

46. 

The evaluation from Johansen High School does not provide a numerical 

rating, but includes comments regarding each major area of performance. The 

evaluations from West High School and Pioneer Elementary School provide comments 

and a numerical rating of respondent’s performance on a scale of 1 through 4. 

Respondent received a rating of either 3 (meets expectations/standards) or 4 (exceeds 

expectations/standards) in all areas of performance. The comments on each of the 

evaluations were generally positive, and no significant performance problems were 

noted. 

47. 

Respondent’s last evaluation as a physical education teacher at West 

High School, signed on April 22, 2021, includes the following entries: 

I. Engaging and Supporting All Students in Learning 

14 

Rating 3.417. Meets Expectations – You engage and 

support all students in learning. You use a variety of 

strategies to support student learning. . . . 

II. Creating and Maintaining an Effective Environment 

for Learning 

Rating 3.358. Meets Expectations – You maintain and 

create an effective environment for learning. You have 

established a good rapport with the students evidenced by 

the banter back and forth in your interactions. . . . 

48. 

Respondent’s subsequent evaluation as a 5th grade physical education 

teacher at Pioneer Elementary School, signed on September 27, 2021, includes the 

following entry: 

Designing Learning Experiences for All 

Total Score: 4  

[Respondent] provides a calm, safe, and productive learning 

environment for all. It is obvious he has made connections 

with students by the way mutual respect is shown between 

him and his class. 

49. 

Respondent’s most recent evaluation as a physical education teacher is 

from the Weaver Union School District, signed on February 8, 2023. It includes the 

following entry: 

Developing as a Professional/Educator 

15 

Total Score: 3 

[Respondent] is an amazing part of the Farmingdale team. 

He is a leader and works to support all students. He has 

good classroom management and will make sure to ask for 

any assistance if it is needed. He has a love for physical 

education and it shows in his lessons. We are lucky to have 

[respondent] and support his journey in education! 

LETTERS OF SUPPORT 

50. 

Respondent submitted four employment recommendation letters dated 

in 2018 and 2020, written by principals and assistant/associate principals at high 

schools where he was then teaching. He also submitted two recommendation letters 

by faculty at the Cal State Stanislaus Department of Kinesiology. One is dated February 

2016, and the other is undated. The letters of recommendation all speak very highly of 

respondent’s knowledge, skills, and commitment to educating students. 

Analysis 

51. 

Respondent testified candidly and credibly. He acknowledged it was 

unprofessional for him to use profanity in text messages to NJ. He knows it was “poor 

judgement” for him to do so, and he is “not proud of it.” Respondent also understands 

in hindsight that he should have referred NJ to another professional when he told 

respondent he felt suicidal in the past, and that he should not have sent NJ a 

screenshot of his resignation letter. 

52. 

Respondent does not feel he acted inappropriately by hugging NJ when 

he gave him the framed jersey. Respondent credibly explained he obtained NJ’s home 

16 

address from a school counselor for purposes of sending the framed jersey. 

Respondent thus had NJ’s home address when he decided to send a pizza to NJ. 

Respondent also credibly explained that his intent was simply to show NJ he cared 

when he signed off a text message by saying “Love you,” and that he was only joking 

when he sent NJ a text message asking him to bring him a beverage from T4. 

53.  Ms. Keeney testified candidly and credibly on respondent’s behalf. She 

has never seen respondent behave or speak inappropriately toward students, though 

she has had limited opportunities to observe him because she teaches mainly at Tracy 

High School. Ms. Keeney was very clear and convincing in her view that coaches must 

maintain professional boundaries with student-athletes, including maintaining 

professionalism in text messages with the team captain. She also observed that it 

might be a breach of professional boundaries for a coach to order food delivered to 

the home address of a student-athlete. 

54.  Mr. Boswell and Ms. Jalique testified candidly and credibly on 

complainant’s behalf. With respect to hugging, in Mr. Boswell’s view it is not 

necessarily inappropriate for a teacher to hug a student. Ms. Jalique opined that it is a 

boundary violation for a teacher to hug a student. She observed that teachers will 

sometimes give students a hug, but it is not something the District encourages. With 

respect to a teacher telling a student he loves the student, both Mr. Boswell and Ms. 

Jalique opined this would be inappropriate and a boundary violation. Mr. Boswell 

opined that it would not necessarily be inappropriate, standing alone, for respondent 

to order pizza delivered to NJ, but that it would be inappropriate for a teacher to ask a 

student to bring them food. Their opinions are persuasive. 

55. 

Based on the evidence as a whole, respondent committed unprofessional 

conduct and/or violated his professional boundaries with NJ when he signed off a text 

17 

message to NJ with “love you”; failed to refer NJ to another professional when NJ told 

him he previously had suicidal thoughts; used profane language in text messages to 

NJ; sent a pizza to NJ’s home address; asked NJ to bring him a beverage (even if only 

sarcastically); and sent NJ a screenshot of his resignation letter. In addition, as 

explained in the Legal Conclusions, below, respondent acted immorally when he used 

profane language in text messages to NJ. 

56. 

The evidence as a whole did not establish that respondent committed 

unprofessional conduct and/or violate his professional boundaries with NJ when he 

obtained NJ’s home address from a school counselor for purposes of sending a 

framed jersey to respondent, nor did the evidence establish that respondent acted 

under false pretenses in obtaining NJ’s address. Also, the evidence did not establish 

that respondent violated professional boundaries or acted unprofessionally when he 

hugged NJ under the circumstances here. 

57. 

Respondent demonstrated significant insight by acknowledging in no 

uncertain terms his misconduct of using profanity in text messages to NJ, and also by 

acknowledging his lapse in failing to refer NJ to an appropriate suicide prevention 

professional, and the inappropriateness of sending a screenshot of his resignation 

letter to NJ. Respondent convincingly testified he has learned from this situation, and 

that he now clearly understands the imperative to maintain appropriate professional 

boundaries and to demonstrate appropriate behavior for his students. Based on 

respondent’s record of employment and his substantial acceptance of responsibility 

for his conduct toward NJ, it is highly unlikely respondent will commit boundary 

violations or other similar lapses in the future. 

18 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

Burden and Standard of Proof 

1. 

Complainant has the burden of proving cause for adverse action by clear 

and convincing evidence to a reasonable certainty. (Ettinger v. Bd. of Medical Quality 

Assurance (1982) 135 Cal.App.3d 583, 855-856.) Clear and convincing evidence 

requires proof that is so clear as to leave no substantial doubt and that is sufficiently 

strong to command the unhesitating assent of every reasonable mind. (In re Marriage 

of Brooks (2008) 169 Cal.App.4th 176, 190.) 

Jurisdiction and Applicable Law 

2. 

Pursuant to Education Code section 44000 et seq., and California Code of 

Regulations, title 5, commencing with section 80001, the Commission is responsible 

for credentialing teachers in public schools in California, including issuing credentials, 

and taking adverse action against applicants and credential holders. (Statutory 

references are to the Education Code unless otherwise specified.) 

3. 

Section 44421 authorizes the Commission to take adverse action against 

an individual’s teaching credential for, among other specified causes, unprofessional 

conduct, evident unfitness for service, immoral conduct, acts of moral turpitude, or for 

any cause which would warrant denial of an application for a credential. Section 44345, 

subdivision (e), allows the Commission to deny an application of one who has 

committed an act involving moral turpitude. 

19 

Alleged Causes for Adverse Action  

UNPROFESSIONAL CONDUCT 

4. 

Unprofessional conduct in the teaching profession has been defined as 

that which violates the rules or ethical code of the profession or is unbecoming of a 

member of the profession in good standing. (Bd. of Ed. of City of Los Angeles v. Swan 

(1953) 41 Cal.2d 546, 553, overruled on other grounds by Bekiaris v. Bd. of Ed. (1972) 6 

Cal.3d 575.) 

5. 

Based on the Factual Findings and Legal Conclusions as a whole, 

complainant established by clear and convincing evidence that respondent committed 

unprofessional conduct when he when he signed off a text message to NJ with “love 

you”; failed to refer NJ to another professional when NJ told him he previously had 

suicidal thoughts; used profane language in text messages to NJ; sent a pizza to NJ’s 

home address; asked NJ to bring him a beverage (even if only sarcastically); and sent 

NJ a screenshot of his resignation letter. For these reasons, and based on the Factual 

Findings and Legal Conclusions as a whole, cause exists for adverse action against 

respondent’s credentials pursuant to section 44421. 

EVIDENT UNFITNESS FOR SERVICE 

6. 

“Evident unfitness for service” means a teacher is clearly not fit, not 

adapted to or unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of temperamental defects 

or inadequacies. (Woodland Joint Unified School Dist. v. Comm’n on Professional 

Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444.) “Unlike ‘unprofessional conduct,’ 

‘evident unfitness for service’ connotes a fixed character trait, presumably not 

remediable merely on receipt of notice that one’s conduct fails to meet the 

expectations of the employing school district.” (Ibid.) 

20 

7. 

Based on the Factual Findings and Legal Conclusions as a whole, 

complainant did not establish by clear and convincing evidence that respondent is 

evidently unfit for service, especially given respondent’s record of employment and 

insights into his misconduct in this matter. Based on the evidence as a whole, 

respondent is fit to serve as a teacher. 

IMMORAL CONDUCT 

8. 

The term “immoral” has been defined generally as “that which is hostile 

to the welfare of the general public and contrary to good morals. . . . [It] includes 

conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, 

dissoluteness; or as willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral indifference 

to the opinions of respectable members of the community, and as an inconsiderate 

attitude toward good order and the public welfare.” (Bd. of Ed. of San Francisco 

Unified School Dist. v. Weiland (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811.) 

9. 

Based on the Factual Findings and Legal Conclusions as a whole, 

complainant established by clear and convincing evidence that respondent engaged in 

immoral conduct when he repeatedly used profanity in his text messages to NJ. For 

these reasons, and based on the Factual Findings and Legal Conclusions as a whole, 

cause exists for adverse action against respondent’s credentials pursuant to section 

44421.  

ACTS OF MORAL TURPITUDE 

10. 

“Moral turpitude” has been defined as “everything done contrary to 

justice, honesty, modesty or good morals.” (Rice v. Alcoholic Beverage Appeals Bd. 

(1979) 89 Cal.App.3d 30, 36.) An act involves moral turpitude if it involves a serious 

21 

breach of a duty owed to another or to society. (In re Stuart K. Lesansky (2001) 25 

Cal.4th 11, 16.) 

11. 

Based on the Factual Findings and Legal Conclusions as a whole, 

complainant established by clear and convincing evidence that respondent committed 

acts of moral turpitude when he repeatedly used profanity in his text messages to NJ. 

For these reasons, and based on the Factual Findings and Legal Conclusions as a 

whole, cause exists for adverse action against respondent’s credentials pursuant to 

sections 44421 and 44345, subdivision (e). 

Fitness to Teach 

12. 

In Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, the California 

Supreme Court concluded that a teaching credential cannot be disciplined for immoral 

conduct, unprofessional conduct, or conduct involving moral turpitude “unless that 

conduct indicates that the [educator] is unfit to teach.” (Id. at p. 229.) The Court 

outlined factors to consider when determining whether an educator’s conduct 

demonstrates unfitness to teach, which have been codified in California Code of 

Regulations, title 5, section 80302, subdivision (a). The criteria are specified and 

applied to respondent’s conduct, as set forth below.  

LIKELIHOOD OF ADVERSE EFFECTS ON STUDENTS, FELLOW TEACHERS, OR THE 

EDUCATIONAL COMMUNITY 

13.  NJ did not testify regarding the effects of respondent’s conduct. 

However, there is a substantial likelihood of an adverse effect whenever a teacher 

repeatedly uses profanity in his communications with that student. There is no 

evidence of adverse effects on any other students, fellow teachers, or the educational 

community beyond NJ. 

22 

PROXIMITY OR REMOTENESS IN TIME 

14. 

Respondent’s misconduct occurred during 2021, and is more proximate 

than remote in time. 

TYPE OF CREDENTIAL HELD 

15. 

Respondent’s credentials will put him in contact with other students who 

would be harmed by any similar misconduct. 

EXTENUATING OR AGGRAVATING CIRCUMSTANCES 

16.  Neither the Education Code nor the applicable regulations specify what 

constitutes “extenuating circumstances.” However, California Code of Regulations, title 

5, section 80300, subdivision (m), defines “mitigating factor” as events or 

circumstances which demonstrate that “the public, school children and the profession 

would be adequately protected by a more lenient degree of adverse action . . . .” 

Mitigating factors present in this matter include the absence of any prior record of 

discipline over some (though not many) years, and clear evidence of respondent’s 

good character as attested in letters of recommendation. 

17. 

California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80300, subdivision (b), lists 

aggravating factors, the presence of which indicate a greater degree of discipline is 

necessary to protect students and the teaching profession. Aggravating factors include 

misconduct that evidences: (1) multiple wrongful acts or a pattern of misconduct; (2) 

bad faith or dishonesty; (3) significant harm to children entrusted to respondent’s care 

and/or harm to the educational system; (4) indifference toward the consequences of 

the misconduct; and (5) misconduct that occurred when respondent had prior notice 

or reprimands for similar misconduct. Of these, respondent committed multiple acts of 

23 

misconduct, with the potential for significant harm to NJ. There is no convincing 

evidence that respondent was dishonest, indifferent to the consequences of his 

conduct, or that he had prior notice or reprimands. On balance, the aggravating 

circumstances do not outweigh the extenuating or mitigating factors. 

PRAISEWORTHINESS OR BLAMEWORTHINESS OF MOTIVES 

18. 

Respondent’s sincere desire to “give back” to students is praiseworthy. 

However, respondent’s inattention to professional boundaries and his repeated use of 

profanity are wholly blameworthy, regardless of his original motive to serve as a 

mentor to NJ. 

LIKELIHOOD OF RECURRENCE 

19. 

The evidence clearly established that respondent has learned from the 

consequences of his misconduct, that he will be far more careful to maintain 

professional boundaries in the future, and that he is highly unlikely to engage in future 

misconduct. 

EXTENT TO WHICH DISCIPLINARY ACTION MAY INFLICT AN ADVERSE IMPACT 

OR CHILLING EFFECT ON CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS OF PERSONS INVOLVED OR 

OTHER TEACHERS 

20. 

There is no evidence that discipline would adversely impact or chill 

respondent or any other teacher in the free exercise of their constitutional rights. 

PUBLICITY OR NOTORIETY OF MISCONDUCT 

21. 

There is no evidence of notoriety surrounding respondent’s misconduct. 

There may be some students and faculty who learned of his misconduct, but it is 

24 

unlikely respondent’s future on-campus relationships will be compromised, provided 

respondent is candid with prospective employers about this disciplinary matter. 

CONCLUSIONS REGARDING MORRISON FACTORS 

22.  On balance, the Morrison factors demonstrate a direct nexus between 

respondent’s misconduct and his fitness to teach. However, the applicable Morrison 

factors do not indicate respondent is unfit to maintain his credentials and continue 

teaching. While some continuing concern is warranted, on balance it is not likely 

respondent will engage in similar misconduct in the future, provided appropriate 

discipline in this case. 

Disposition 

23. 

Licensing disciplinary matters like this are not designed to punish an 

individual. (Camacho v. Youde (1979) 95 Cal.App.3d 161, 165.) Rather, a licensing 

agency should be primarily concerned with protecting the public. (Fahmy v. Medical 

Bd. of California (1995) 38 Cal.App.4th 810, 817.) In this matter, respondent’s 

misconduct was not so extreme as to indicate revocation of his credentials is necessary 

to protect the public. Public protection will be achieved by imposing a two-year term 

of probation that will allow the Commission to monitor respondent’s conduct and 

impress upon respondent the seriousness of his misconduct and the likelihood future 

misconduct could lead to revocation of his credentials. 

ORDER 

The Clear Single Subject Teaching Credential issued to respondent Omar Akram 

Musleh is revoked. However, the revocation is stayed and respondent is placed on 

25 

probation for two years from the effective date of this order on the following terms 

and conditions. 

SEVERABILITY CLAUSE: Each condition of probation contained herein is a 

separate and distinct condition. If any condition of probation is declared 

unenforceable in whole, in part, or to any extent, the remaining conditions of 

probation, and each of them, shall not be affected. Each condition of probation shall 

separately be valid and enforceable to the fullest extent permitted by law. 

1. 

NEW CREDENTIALS SUBJECT TO ORDER: Any new credential issued by 

the Commission to respondent during the period of probation shall be subject to the 

same terms and conditions of probation, as set forth herein. 

2. 

OBEY ALL LAWS: Respondent shall obey all federal, state, and local laws 

and regulations, including, but not limited to, the statutes and regulations of the 

Commission. 

Except for minor traffic infractions, within 72 hours of any incident resulting in 

respondent’s arrest, the filing of any criminal charges, or citation issued, respondent 

shall submit a full and detailed description of the incident to the Commission. For 

purposes of this condition, a “minor traffic infraction” includes only traffic violations 

which are punishable by a maximum of $250, and do not subject the offender to 

incarceration or probation. 

3. 

COMPLIANCE WITH PROBATION: Respondent shall fully comply with the 

terms and conditions of this order and cooperate with representatives of the 

Commission in its monitoring and investigation of his compliance. Any credentials 

issued to respondent during the period of probation shall be subject to the conditions 

contained herein. 

26 

During the period of probation, respondent shall submit quarterly reports, 

under penalty of perjury, on forms designated by the Commission, certifying and 

documenting compliance with all terms and conditions of probation. 

4. 

COOPERATION WITH COMMISSION: During the period of probation, 

respondent shall be available for interviews with the Commission in person or by 

telephone upon reasonable notice. 

5. 

MAINTAIN CURRENT CONTACT INFORMATION: Within seven days of the 

effective date of this order, respondent shall notify the Commission of his current 

mailing address and phone number where voicemail messages may be left. 

Respondent will notify the Commission in writing of any change of mailing address or 

residence within 10 days of such change. 

6. 

NOTIFICATION OF EMPLOYER: Within five days of the effective date of 

this order, respondent shall provide a true and correct copy of this decision, together 

with a true and correct copy of the accusation, which forms the basis for the decision, 

to respondent’s employer, if any, and to respondent’s immediate supervisor at that 

employer. Within five days of complying with this notification requirement, respondent 

shall submit proof of compliance to the Commission. 

If respondent changes employment at any time during probation, respondent 

shall again comply with this notification requirement within seven days of accepting 

new employment and shall again submit proof of compliance to the Commission 

within five days of complying with this notification requirement. 

7. 

VIOLATION OF PROBATION: The Commission shall retain jurisdiction 

over respondent during the period of probation. If respondent violates any term or 

condition of this order, after giving him written notice and an opportunity to be heard 

27 

on the issue of any violation of probation, the Commission may set aside the stay 

order and impose the revocation of respondent’s credentials. If an accusation or 

petition to revoke probation is filed against respondent during probation, the 

probation period shall automatically be extended until a final decision is made on the 

accusation or petition. 

8. 

COMPLETION OF PROBATION: Upon successful completion of the terms 

of this probation, respondent’s credentials shall be fully restored. 

DATE: April 5, 2023

TIMOTHY J. ASPINWALL  

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings 

28 

 
 
 
