BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Petition to Revoke Probation Against: 

DIOKA EZENWA OKORIE, 

Clear Multiple Subject Teaching Credential, and 

Administrative Services Credential Certificate of Eligibility, 

Respondent 

Case No. 1-331539603 

OAH No. 2022060092 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Abraham M. Levy, Administrative Law Judge, State of California, Office of 

Administrative Hearings, heard this matter on November 8, 2022, via videoconference.

Molly E. Selway, Deputy Attorney General, represented petitioner, Mary Vixie 

Sandy, Ed.D., Executive Director of the Commission on Teacher Credentialing of the 

State of California (Commission). 

Chijioke O. Ikonte, Attorney at Law, Law Offices of Akudinobi & Ikonte, 

represented respondent, Dioka Ezenwa Okorie, who was present. 

The record was closed, and the matter submitted for decision on November 8, 

2022. 

SUMMARY 

Petitioner asks that respondent’s probation be revoked due to his February 10, 

2021, conviction for driving under the influence. Based on the evidence as a whole, 

while cause exists to revoke respondent’s probation, respondent presented sufficient 

evidence he is rehabilitated that allowing him to remain on probation is not against 

the public interest. The petition to revoke respondent’s probation is denied.

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

License History 

1. 

On May 29, 2002, the Commission issued a Clear Multiple Subject 

Teaching Credential to respondent. The Multiple Subject Teaching Credential was in 

effect at all times relevant to the charges brought herein and was set to expire on June 

1, 2022, according to the license certification admitted as evidence. But, as noted 

below, respondent stated he has renewed his teaching credential. On January 1, 2007, 

the Commission issued Administrative Services Credential Certificate of Eligibility to 

respondent. Information submitted regarding this certification does not indicate 

whether this certification was in effect during the time relevant to the allegations in 

this matter or whether the credential/certificate of eligibility has expired.

2

Disciplinary History and Probation 

2.

In a disciplinary action entitled “

," Case No. 1-331539603, the Commission issued a Decision, 

effective September 9, 2019, which revoked respondent’s Credentials. However, the 

revocation was stayed, and respondent's Clear Multiple Subject Teaching Credential 

and Administrative Service Credential Certificate of Eligibility were placed on probation 

for a period of five years, with a suspension of 120 days, with certain terms and 

conditions. 

3. 

In imposing discipline, the Commission determined that respondent 

disregarded the property rights of the school district where he was working when he 

did not return the laptop and iPad the school district issued to him and then falsely 

stated he did not know the whereabouts of those items. The Commission further 

found his conduct to be obstructive and dishonest. The district was also investigating 

respondent for molesting a student. That charge in the Commission’s decision, 

however, was dismissed. 

4. 

Among the terms and conditions of respondent’s probation, he is 

required to comply with all terms and conditions of probation and obey all laws. Those 

specific terms and conditions are as follows:

Condition 7 provides as follows: 

Obey all Laws. Respondent shall obey all federal, state, and 

local laws, including all provisions of the California 

Education Code. To permit monitoring of compliance with 

this condition, respondent shall submit completed 

fingerprint forms and fingerprint fees within 30 days of the 

3

effective date of the decision, unless previously submitted 

as part of the teaching credential application process as 

determined by the monitor. Failure to comply with these 

provisions shall be considered a probation violation. 

Condition 13 provides as follows:  

Violation of Probation. If Respondent violates any term or 

condition of this Order, the Commission may refer the 

matter to the Attorney General’s Office to file a Petition to 

Revoke Probation, and after giving Respondent notice and 

opportunity to be heard, may set aside the stay order and 

impose the stayed discipline. If during the period of 

probation, a Petition to Revoke Probation has been filed 

against Respondent’s Credentials, or the Attorney General’s 

Office has been asked to prepare a Petition to Revoke 

Probation against Respondent’s Credentials, the 

probationary period shall automatically be extended and 

shall not expire until final action is taken on the Petition by 

the Commission.

5.

On January 31, 2022, petitioner filed the petition to revoke respondent’s 

probation alleging that respondent’s probation should be rescinded and his 

credentials revoked because he violated his disciplinary probation when he was 

convicted of driving under the influence of alcohol on February 10, 2021, in violation 

of Vehicle Code section 23152, subdivision (b). Respondent was placed on criminal 

probation for three years for this offense. 

4

Respondent’s Conviction and Respondent’s Letter to the Commission 

6.

The facts and circumstances of respondent’s conviction are found in a 

California Highway Patrol (CHP) report which was received into evidence pursuant to 

(1997) 16 Cal.4th 448, 461-464. 

As detailed in this report, on December 18, 2019, a California Highway Patrol 

Officer responded to a report of a car on fire in the Los Angeles area. When the officer 

arrived, he observed respondent standing outside the car and spoke to respondent. He 

observed respondent had red, watery eyes and smelled a strong odor of alcohol 

coming from respondent. Respondent denied consuming alcoholic beverages. The 

officer administered a series of field sobriety tests (FSTs), which respondent failed. 

Respondent was then arrested and transported to a nearby hospital for a blood test. 

Respondent refused to consent to the test, and the officer obtained a warrant to 

obtain the blood test. After the warrant was obtained, a technician obtained a blood 

sample from respondent which, when analyzed, showed a blood alcohol concentration 

of 0.16 percent. 

7. 

Respondent reported his arrest to the Commission on March 20, 2020, 

based on a March 10, 2020, notice he received for his trial date for driving under the 

influence. In his letter he stated his car engine caught on fire, and he called the fire

department. He denied in the letter that he was drunk or impaired at the time of the 

fire.

Respondent’s Testimony 

8. 

Respondent’s testimony is summarized as follows: 

5

Regarding the circumstances of the DUI, he said he was driving from a friend’s 

home in Long Beach when his car engine caught on fire, and he called 911. He didn’t 

realize he was impaired when he called 911. A responding police officer smelled 

alcohol on his breath and administered FSTs, which he did not successfully complete. 

He denied that he did not cooperate with the CHP Officer and that he refused to take 

the breathalyzer or the blood test. He accused the CHP officer of lying.

Respondent testified when he wrote the letter to the Commission denying he 

was impaired, he didn’t have the results of the blood test. Once he received the test 

results, he did not dispute the results and pled no contest to the DUI. Respondent said 

he has fully complied with the terms of the DUI probation, and he said he found the 

requirements meaningful. 

After the DUI respondent sought treatment for depression. He attributed his 

depression to the stress of losing his teaching position, being wrongly accused of 

molestation, and finding it difficult to obtain employment. Respondent also said the 

stress of losing his father has contributed to his depression. He said he sees a therapist 

and has been diagnosed with depression. Respondent said he has been seeing a 

therapist for eleven months and plans to continue treatment. 

Respondent denied he has an alcohol abuse problem. He said he drinks one or 

two drinks of alcohol once every two weeks. He stressed he does not drink and drive, 

and if he drinks, he will use a ride-sharing service. 

Regarding the status of his Multiple Subject Teaching Credential, respondent 

said he renewed the credential in late June 2022. 

6

Character References 

9.

Respondent called as character witnesses Linda Lewis, Dorothy 

Armstrong, and Ikeena Okorie. 

10.  Ms. Lewis testified that she has known respondent through their church. 

She attended daily prayer groups with him and his family. She described him as a very 

respectful person, who presented as a good husband and father. Ms. Lewis is aware of 

respondent’s DUI. She said the DUI doesn’t change her opinion of him because every 

person can make a mistake. 

11.  Ms. Armstrong has known respondent for twenty years. They were 

colleagues at the high school where he taught. She considers him a close friend. She 

notes that respondent makes himself available to tutor students in math and advanced 

math. Ms. Armstrong said her own grandchildren see respondent for help in math. 

Ms. Armstrong is aware of respondent’s DUI. She said everyone makes a 

mistake, and he was under a lot of pressure at the time. Ms. Armstrong added that she 

does not believe respondent should lose his ability to teach based on a “lie,” referring 

to the molestation charge that was dismissed against him. 

12. Mr. Okorie is respondent’s brother. Mr. Okorie testified that respondent 

is a very wonderful person and a very loving father. He also said regarding the DUI 

that everyone makes a mistake. Mr. Okorie, in addition, stated that he feels the 

accusation against his brother was false, referring to the molestation charge.

7

Parties’ Arguments 

13.

Petitioner argued that due to respondent’s history of dishonesty, as the 

Commission found in its Decision reinstating his certification, it is not in the public 

interest to allow him to remain credentialed. 

14. 

Respondent asked in closing that he be allowed to remain licensed. 

Respondent stated he was not dishonest when he said he was not impaired in his 

letter to the Commission because he held a good faith belief he wasn’t, and he hadn’t 

yet received the blood test results showing his blood alcohol content. Once he was 

presented with this evidence, he pled no contest to the charge. Respondent further 

has complied with the terms of his criminal probation, and he has complied, for the 

most part, with the terms of his disciplinary probation. Respondent stated that to 

revoke his license to teach would be an extreme response given these factors.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

Standard of Proof 

1. 

Complainant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the 

evidence that the charges in the petition to revoke probation are true. (

(2010) 184 Cal.App.4th 1434, 1441.) A preponderance of the 

evidence means that the evidence on one side outweighs the evidence on the other 

side, not necessarily in number of witnesses or quantity, but in its effect on those to 

whom it is addressed. In other words, it refers to evidence that has more convincing 

force than that opposed to it. (

171 Cal.App.4th 1549, 1567.) 

 (2009) 

8

Cause Exists to Revoke Probation 

2.

Cause exists to find that respondent violated the terms of his probation 

due to his February 2021 conviction for driving under the influence in violation of 

Vehicle Code section 12352 subdivision (b). As a result of this conviction, respondent 

violated Condition # 7, which requires respondent to obey all laws. As a result, under 

Condition # 13, petitioner may seek to revoke respondent’s probation. 

Evaluation 

3. 

Now that cause has been found to revoke respondent’s teaching 

credential, the issue is whether revocation of respondent’s probation is required to 

ensure public protection. Considering the facts of record, revocation of respondent’s 

certificate is not needed to ensure public protection. Respondent presented sufficient 

evidence he is rehabilitated that a contrary conclusion would amount to impermissible 

punishment. (

(1995) 38 Cal.App.4th 810, 817.)

Respondent’s DUI, while a serious incident involving failure to obey the law, 

appears to be an isolated instance of respondent’s failure to follow the law. This 

appears to be respondent’s only instance of such behavior. Respondent further 

testified he took responsibility for his conduct, credibly stated he learned from his 

mistake, and he sought therapy and continues with therapy. He stated credibly he will 

not drink and drive again.

Consideration was given to extending respondent’s probation due to his 

probation violation. But based on the factors considered above, and the fact that he 

still has a substantial period remaining on his probation, extending probation is not 

needed to ensure public protection.

9

ORDER 

The Petition to Revoke Probation is denied.

DATE: November 18, 2022

ABRAHAM M. LEVY 

Administrative Law Judge

Office of Administrative Hearings

10 

 
