BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Accusation Against: 

MATTHEW STANLEY SORENSEN, Respondent. 

Agency Case No. 2-141908024 

OAH No. 2022030787 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Harden Sooper, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ), Office of Administrative 

Hearings (OAH), State of California, heard this matter by videoconference on October 

11, 12, and 13, 2022. 

Gillian E. Friedman, Deputy Attorney General, represented complainant Mary 

Vixie Sandy, Executive Officer of the California Commission on Teacher Credentialing 

(Commission). 

Respondent Matthew Stanley Sorensen represented himself at the hearing. 

The ALJ received oral and documentary evidence. The record was closed and 

the matter was submitted for decision on October 13, 2022. 

During the hearing, complainant moved to seal Exhibits E and I through P, as 

they contain the names of minors. Respondent did not oppose the motion. On 

November 8, 2022, the ALJ issued a protective order sealing Exhibits E and I through P. 

and medical record number from Exhibits A and B and former student names from 

Exhibits BB and EE, for confidentiality purposes. 

SUMMARY 

allegations of misconduct occurring during the 2018 2019 and 2019 2020 school 

years, when respondent was a social studies teacher and baseball coach at Golden 

Valley High School. Complainant established by clear and convincing evidence 

respondent committed misconduct involving students, including one occasion when 

he showed an inappropriate dance video to a student in his class

misconduct constitutes unprofessional and immoral conduct, and an act of moral 

turpitude, within the meaning of the Education Code, and therefore establishes cause 

indicates 

is related to his fitness to teach. The totality of 

evidence in this matter supports a public reproval of respondent for his misconduct. 

Application of the 

factors 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Jurisdictional Matters 

1. 

Respondent holds a Single Subject Teaching Credential (credential). The 

credential, which was in full force and effect at all times relevant to the charges alleged 

in the Accusation, was originally issued in 2011 and last renewed in 2020. The 

credential will expire on July 1, 2025, unless renewed. 

2 

2. 

On December 7, 2021, the Commission filed an Accusation against 

respondent. The Accusation alleges four 

credential: (1) unprofessional conduct, (2) immoral conduct, (3) evident unfitness for 

service, and (4) acts involving moral turpitude. 

3. 

On December 23, 2021, respondent filed a Notice of Defense, requesting 

a hearing in this matter. 

Background and Investigation 

4. 

Between 2017 and 2020, respondent worked as a social studies teacher 

and baseball coach at Golden Valley High School (Golden Valley) in the William S. Hart 

Union High School District (Hart District). Because the district hired respondent in the 

middle of the 2017 2018 school year, he remained a probationary teacher for the 

following two school years: 2018 2019 and 2019 2020. 

5. 

On November 4, 2019, Golden Valley Principal Salvador Frias met with 

respondent and discussed several allegations of misconduct against respondent 

related to his employment at Golden Valley. Respondent denied or did not comment 

on some allegations and claimed others were a result of misinterpretation of his 

actions. 

Principal Frias 

recommended Hart District not reelect respondent for the 2020 2021 school year. 

Principal Frias 

t generated an unusually high volume of 

complaints. He could not recall another teacher or coach being the subject of as many 

complaints as respondent. 

6. 

On February 19, 2020, the Governing Board of the Hart District decided 

not to reelect respondent for the 2020

employment 

with the Hart District ended on June 30, 2020. 

3 

7. 

No cause is required for a district to decline reelection of a probationary 

teacher. However, because allegations of misconduct preceded 

to non-reelect respondent, the Hart District notified the Commission of its decision not 

to reelect respondent, pursuant to California Code of Regulations, title 5 (CCR), section 

80303. (Ex. 3, p. A51.) 

8. 

The Commission assigned Investigator Judith Arce to investigate the 

allegations of misconduct against respondent. Investigator Arce gathered documents 

and interviewed witnesses. She documented her findings in a report dated December 

23, 2020, and concluded the Commission had grounds to take adverse action against 

. (Ex. 6.) 

9. 

Complainant offered no evidence of prior adverse action against 

Substantiated Allegations of Respon

G.S. HEARING TESTIMONY 

10. 

school year 

2020 

. G.S. testified 

respondent frequently asked her personal questions during class time, such as about 

her family, friends, and dating life. He initiated similar conversations outside of class 

when he encountered G.S. on campus. Respondent also asked G.S. for input during 

class about a baseball team potluck meal he was planning and on one occasion, he 

asked G.S. to retrieve his lunch for him during class time. G.S. perceived respondent as 

which made her 

uncomfortable. 

4 

11. 

estified respondent 

asked her to organize a dance for the baseball team, to be performed during an 

upcoming team banquet. Respondent requested G.S. recruit other female dance team 

members to participate in the dance and 

Respondent offered 

his classroom as a practice space for the dancers. When G.S. suggested respondent 

coordinate with the supervisor of 

just stay 

between [G.S.] and him and [the supervisor] did not need to know about it.

12. 

Respondent showed G.S. a video he described as female students 

dancing for his baseball team at another school where he worked before Golden 

Valley. G.S. testified she was very uncomfortable watching the video because the 

inappropriate,

students 

dancing like basically 

On the same day it occurred, G.S. reported this incident to the dance team 

supervisor and then an assistant principal. Shortly thereafter, G.S. asked to transfer out 

history class because respondent made her uncomfortable. 

13.  On January 16, 2020, Nicole Pollard, the dance team supervisor, sent an 

email to Assistant Principal Brian Necessary, summarizing her recent conversation with 

(Ex. 4, p. A56.) On December 22, 2020, Investigator 

(Ex. 7, p. A69.) 

the hearing. 

14. 

Respondent admitted asking G.S. to choreograph a dance for the 

baseball team but denied showing her an inappropriate video. He claimed he showed 

G.S. a video on YouTube produced by Disney. He further stated he asked multiple 

Respondent stated he typically asked students about their families, but had no specific 

5 

When asked on cross-examination why he did not inquire about G

his class, respondent claimed he was not aware until much later of her transfer 

Respondent speculated, without supporting evidence, 

to 

deny her boyfriend a spot on the Golden Valley baseball team. 

15. 

G.S. testified credibly about her interactions with respondent. Her 

testimony was corroborated by prior consistent statements to Ms. Pollard and 

Investigator Arce. 

uncorroborated, as was his claim G.S. retaliated against him for a decision he made as 

a baseball coach

ony 

claiming 

is not credible, given his admission he elected 

to ask her to coordinate a dance for the baseball team. 

16. 

substantiated the conduct alleged in paragraphs 15f, 

15g, and 15h of the Accusation, as follows: (1) respondent would approach students in 

class multiple times during the same period, (2) respondent asked a student to go get 

him lunch during class time, and (3) respondent asked a student to go check in with 

players to see what they were bringing to potluck during class time. 

also substantiated the conduct alleged in paragraph 16 of the Accusation, as follows: 

respondent showed G.S. a video of the type of dance he wanted G.S. to coordinate, 

/// 

/// 

6 

RESPONDENT S ADMISSIONS 

17. 

Respondent admitted the conduct alleged in paragraph15j of the 

Accusation, as follows: A female student reported that respondent called her princess. 

Respondent 

point

POSSESSION OF MARIJUANA 

18.  On October 24, 2019, Garrett Leon, a Golden Valley baseball coach, sent 

an email to Assistant Principal Jennifer Ambrose, relaying allegations that respondent 

possessed marijuana in a coaching bag during a Golden Valley baseball game. Mr. 

r 

coach told him occurred. (Ex. 4, p. A52.) The email contains double hearsay and cannot 

form the basis for a factual finding. 

19.  On December 14, 2020, Investigator Arce interviewed G.M., a former 

Golden Valley baseball player (initials used to protect the fo

. 

(Ex. 7, p. A67.) G.M. did not testify at the hearing; his statement to Investigator Arce is 

hearsay and cannot form the basis of a factual finding. 

20. 

Complainant did not establish respondent possessed marijuana during a 

Golden Valley baseball game, as alleged in paragraph 14 of the Accusation. 

7 

Respondent denied possessing marijuana. 

ADDITIONAL ALLEGATIONS 

21. 

Complainant did not prove the conduct alleged in paragraphs 15a 

through 15e and 15i of the Accusation, as follows: 

(1) During summer camp in 2019, respondent had invited 

cross country girls to run through the sprinklers on the 

field. Respondent did not invite the cross country boys. 

(2) Respondent asked a student, without context about his 

first kiss. Respondent further stated that he remembered 

seen. Bigg

(3) Respondent requested that female students be team 

manager and did not base his selection on baseball 

knowledge. 

(4) Respondent attempted to organize a joint softball 

practice with softball players. 

(5) A staff member reported that respondent reset the 

seating chart to be boy/girl and when asked why he 

stated to teach them to be gentlemen. 

(6) Respondent drove two female students in a vehicle. 

/// 

8 

and notes from the November 4, 2019 meeting contain only hearsay, unsupported by 

direct testimony, regarding these allegations and therefore cannot form the basis for a 

factual finding. 

22. 

Respondent denied the conduct underlying these allegations. He testified 

the cross-country runners, male and female, routinely ran through a portion of the 

baseball field. He denied inviting female runners to do so, as alleged in the Accusation. 

He denied discussing his first kiss with a student. He testified he solicited the entire 

student body, over the public announcement system, regarding an open position as 

the baseball team manager. He denied requesting only female students fill the 

position. He admitted organizing a Halloween softball game involving both baseball 

Accusation. He testified he maintained an alphabetical classroom seating chart, not 

alternating male and female as alleged in the Accusation, but admitted he encouraged 

the Accusation. 

Criminal Convictions 

23.  On October 30, 1997, in the Superior Court of California, County of Los 

Angeles, case number 6DW12442, respondent was convicted upon his plea of no 

contest of one count of violating Penal Code section 853.7, failure to appear in court, a 

misdemeanor. 

24.  On October 30, 1997, in the Superior Court of California, County of Los 

Angeles, case number 6DW12293, respondent was convicted upon his plea of no 

9 

contest of one count of violating Vehicle Code section 14601.1, subdivision (a), driving 

on a suspended license, a misdemeanor. On June 30, 2021, the court granted 

Matters in Aggravation 

25. 

G.S., a student entrusted 

in his care, and significantly harmed the educational system. Respondent violated the 

trust placed in him as a teacher when he showed G.S. an inappropriate video, causing 

her to become uncomfortable and to immediately report the incident to the dance 

team supervisor. Respondent failed to maintain appropriate boundaries with G.S., 

repeatedly asking her personal questions, including about her dating life, before 

showing her the video. 

class. When a teacher abuses the trust of a minor student in such a manner, the 

educational system is damaged because the sanctity of the teacher-student 

relationship, a matter of public trust, is compromised. 

26. 

Respondent demonstrated indifference toward the consequence of the 

misconduct. 

knew or should have known his misconduct could negatively impact G.S. Although 

respondent testified he 

testify she was uncomfortable with 

his behavior, respondent continued to speculate that G.S. fabricated her allegations as 

retaliation against him for his decisions as a baseball coach. He also testified he was 

feelings earlier in the school year and he 

Even after G.S. testified at the hearing, respondent did 

not demonstrate he appreciates the consequences of his misconduct. 

/// 

10 

27. 

evidences multiple acts of wrongdoing and a 

pattern of misconduct involving poor judgement. Each substantiated allegation of 

and maintain proper boundaries between himself and his students. He misused class 

time by conversing with students about personal or extracurricular topics and tasked 

G.S. with retrieving his lunch during class time. His decision to show G.S. an 

inappropriate video was the culmination of a pattern of his exercising poor judgement. 

28. 

After his employment at Golden Valley ended in June 2020, respondent 

took a position as a teacher at Monterey High School (Monterey) for the 2020 2021 

school year. Monterey conducted classes remotely during that school year and once 

classes returned in-person, respondent left the position because he did not want to 

move to Monterey. Respondent currently teaches at a charter school in Palmdale, 

called The Palmdale Aerospace Academy (TPAA). 

29. 

Respondent received positive performance reviews during his 

employment at Golden Valley. In 2018 and 2019, he received an overall rating of 

s. C, D.) In an evaluation dated November 2, 2019, Principal 

gets along well with everyone. . . . [Respondent] will continue to grow and help make 

B13.) The November 2, 2019 evaluation was 

not signed by either respondent or Principal Frias. 

30. 

Respondent received a positive performance review during his 

employment at Monterey. In 2020, respondent received an overall rating of 

Q, p. B128.) 

11 

31. 

Respondent submitted an unsigned 2021 2022 TPAA performance 

evaluation, dated February 24, 2021, showing he met all standards for the evaluation 

period. (Ex. H.) When asked on cross-examination if his supervisors at TPAA were 

aware of the pending allegations against him, respondent became defensive and 

32. 

Respondent submitted multiple letters of gratitude written by students 

between 2015 and 2021. Respondent explained he assigns students to write letters to 

staff members around Thanksgiving and some students elected to write a letter to 

him. Some students referred 

wrote their letters. 

33.  Nine Golden Valley teachers wrote letters of recommendation for 

respondent in 2021. The authors appear to have intended for respondent to use the 

letters during a job search. None of the letters reference any allegations of misconduct 

against respondent and it is unclear whether they were aware of the allegations. 

34. 

Rex Ives and Kelvin Parker, who both worked as Golden Valley baseball 

ethic. In an email dated October 12, 2022, former Golden Valley baseball coach Josue 

s character. 

35. 

Respondent submitted two unsigned letters from former Golden Valley 

character and work ethic. Both letters contain additional hearsay statements about the 

allegations against respondent. However, neither former student testified, and their 

hearsay statements cannot form the basis for a factual finding. 

/// 

12 

36. 

In both a letter he submitted to the Commission, dated December 1, 

2020, and his testimony at the hearing, respondent claimed the allegations against him 

were false and were made in retaliation against him by an assistant baseball coach and 

students, including G.S. In his letter, respondent wrote

attempt to hurt me for a decision that was made while I was the head baseball coach 

imony at hearing did not corroborate this claim. Although 

respondent testified credibly about the importance of his teaching credential to him 

and his family, he did not express remorse for his misconduct. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

Burden and Standard of Proof 

1. 

Because this case involves a professional license, complainant bears the 

burden of proof to establish cause for adverse action by clear and convincing evidence 

to a reasonable certainty. (

(1982) 135 

Cal.App.3d 853, 855-856.) This means the burden rests with complainant to offer proof 

(1990) 224 Cal.App.3d 478, 487; citations omitted.) 

Applicable Law 

2. 

Education Code section 44000 et seq. and CCR, section 80000 et seq., 

provide that the Commission is responsible for credentialing teachers in public schools 

in California, including issuing credentials and taking adverse action against applicants 

13 

and crede

3. 

Education Code section 44421 authorizes the Commission to take 

adverse action against an individual's teaching credentials for immoral conduct, 

unprofessional conduct, evident unfitness for service, or any cause which would 

warrant denial of an application for a credential. 

4. 

Pursuant to Education Code section 44345, subdivision (e), the 

Commission may deny any application for the issuance or renewal of a credential 

5. 

action for an act of unprofessional misconduct is needed to adequately protect the 

public, schoolchi

Aggravating factors include the following, as 

set forth in section 80300, subdivisions (b)(2), (b)(4), and (b)(5): 

(2) that the misconduct evidences multiple acts of 

wrongdoing or demonstrate a pattern of misconduct; 

(4) that the misconduct significantly harmed a child 

entrusted to the care of a credential holder or applicant, 

significantly harmed the public or the educational system; 

(5) that the holder or applicant demonstrated indifference 

toward the consequence of the misconduct. 

/// 

14 

Fitness to Teach 

6. 

Terms such as immorality, moral turpitude, and unprofessional conduct 

are so general that they must be given meaning in relation to the particular 

professional involved. (

(1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 220.) 

In 

, the California Supreme Court held that adverse action may not be 

imposed against a teacher in the absence of evidence showing his unfitness to teach. 

As a result, the Court requires a nexus between the misconduct in question and the 

profession of teaching. 

7. 

For purposes of determining the relationship between the misconduct 

proven and a 

the duties authorized by the credential, the various factors enumerated in 

have been codified at CCR, section 80302. The criteria are specified and applied to 

respondent as follows. 

THE LIKELIHOOD THAT THE CONDUCT MAY HAVE ADVERSELY EFFECTED 

STUDENTS, FELLOW TEACHERS, OR THE EDUCATIONAL COMMUNITY, AND THE 

DEGREE OF SUCH ADVERSITY ANTICIPATED 

8. 

impacted the Golden Valley community. G.S. testified she struggled to learn while in 

his class after he showed her the inappropriate dance video. Principal Frias noted he 

received an unusually high volume of complaints about respondent, which 

demonstrates at least some negative impact felt by the Golden Valley community. 

/// 

15 

THE PROXIMITY OR REMOTENESS IN TIME OF THE CONDUCT 

9. 

The misconduct at Golden Valley occurred during the 2018 2019 and 

2019 2020 school years, between approximately three and four years ago. A period of 

five years or less is not remote for purposes of this 

factor. (

(2010) 184 Cal.App.4th 462, 477.) 

little weight in considering whether respondent is currently fit to teach. 

THE TYPE OF CREDENTIAL HELD BY THE PERSON INVOLVED 

10. 

s him to teach students in grades 12 

and below, which encompasses an impressionable population of students. (

.) 

Although respondent was not teaching elementary or middle school students at the 

time of his misconduct, his credential allows him to do so. In 

, the court found 

appropriate adult role models, this factor weighs in favor of finding of unfitness to 

. at 477.) 

THE EXTENUATING OR AGGRAVATING CIRCUMSTANCES SURROUNDING THE 

CONDUCT 

11. 

Applying the definitions set forth in CCR, section 80300, subdivisions 

(b)(2), (b)(4), and (b)(5), there are aggravating circumstances applicable to 

r

. His misconduct significantly harmed G.S. and demonstrated 

indifference toward the consequence of the misconduct. Neither at the time of the 

conduct or at the hearing did respondent appear to appreciate the nature and 

16 

consequences of his actions. Respondent engaged in a pattern of misconduct 

involving poor judgement. 

THE PRAISEWORTHINESS OR BLAMEWORTHINESS OF THE MOTIVES RESULTING 

IN THE CONDUCT 

12. 

Respondent alone is to blame for his misconduct. He failed to maintain 

proper boundaries with his students, especially G.S. 

THE LIKELIHOOD OF THE RECURRENCE OF THE QUESTIONED CONDUCT 

13. 

Respondent did not express remorse for his misconduct, instead focusing 

on his belief he was the subject of retaliation related to his work as a baseball coach. 

Because respondent does not appear to fully appreciate the nature and consequences 

of his actions, an elevated likelihood of recurrence exists. 

THE EXTENT TO WHICH DISCIPLINARY ACTION MAY INFLICT AN ADVERSE 

IMPACT OR CHILLING EFFECT UPON THE CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS OF THE 

PERSON INVOLVED, OR OTHER CERTIFIED PERSONS 

14. 

The outcome of this case will have no chilling effect on credentialed 

teachers exercising their constitutional rights. 

THE PUBLICITY OR NOTORIETY GIVEN TO THE CONDUCT 

15. 

An important element of this factor is whether notoriety from 

misconduct would impair future on-campus relationships. (

Resp

(2011) 194 Cal.App.4th 1454, 1463.) 

while he was at Golden 

17 

Valley. However, there is no evidence his misconduct negatively affected or was even 

known by others at his subsequent employment at Monterey and TPAA. 

OVERALL CONCLUSION 

16. 

R

is related to his fitness and ability to effectively 

teach. 

Causes for Adverse Action 

17.  Having determined that r

and ability to teach, the next step is to analyze whether the misconduct supports any 

of the statutory grounds for adverse action under Education Code section 44421. 

FIRST CAUSE FOR DISCIPLINE: UNPROFESSIONAL CONDUCT 

18. 

Unprofessional conduct is that which violates the rules or ethical code of 

a profession or is unbecoming a member of a profession in good standing. (

(1953) 41 Cal.2d 546, 553.) 

19. 

Complainant established by clear and convincing evidence r

behavior involving G.S. 

was unprofessional conduct because it was unbecoming a member of the teaching 

profession in good standing. Cause therefore exists for adverse action against 

r

for unprofessional 

conduct, based on Factual Findings 9 16. 

SECOND CAUSE FOR DISCIPLINE: IMMORAL CONDUCT 

20. 

is that which is hostile to the welfare of the general 

public and contrary to good morals. It includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or 
18 

indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, and dissoluteness. Immoral conduct is 

Or, it can be conduct that is willful, flagrant, or shameless, conduct showing moral 

indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the community, and an 

inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public welfare. (

(1960) 179 Cal. App.2d 808, 

811.) 

21. 

behavior involving G.S. was immoral conduct because it was willful conduct showing 

moral indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the community. There is 

no justification for showing an inappropriate video to a student. Cause therefore exists 

for adverse action against r

44421 for immoral conduct, based on Factual Findings 9 15. 

THIRD CAUSE FOR DISCIPLINE: EVIDENT UNFITNESS FOR SERVICE 

22. 

unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of temperamental defects or 

inadequacies. . . . [The term] connotes a fixed character trait, presumably not 

(1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, at 1444.) 

23. 

Complainant did not establish by clear and convincing evidence 

misconduct demonstrated an evident unfitness for service. Although 

involving G.S. was serious, complainant provided no 

evidence of prior credential discipline or evidence of other, similar misconduct related 

19 

to respondent showing inappropriate videos to students. 

time to send a student to retrieve his lunch and discuss a potluck event were not 

indicative of an evident unfitness for service

The evidence did not establish respondent is clearly not fit to 

teach by reason of a fixed character trait. Cause therefore does not exist for adverse 

action against r

for 

evidence unfitness to teach, based on Factual Findings 9 16. 

FOURTH CAUSE FOR DISCIPLINE: ACTS OF MORAL TURPITUDE 

24.  Moral turpitude has generally been held to 

which a man owes to his fellowmen, or to society in general, contrary to the accepted 

and customary rule of right and duty between man 

(1988) 200 Cal. App.3d 82, 87.) 

25. 

Complainant established by clear and convincing evidence respondent 

committed an act of moral turpitude when he showed G.S. an inappropriate dance 

video. Cause therefore exists for adverse action against r

pursuant to Education Code section 44421 in conjunction with Education Code section 

44345, subdivision (e), based on Factual Findings 9 15. 

Disposition 

26. 

Considering the entirety of the record in this case, revocation of 

re

was the most serious misconduct. Overall, he demonstrated a pattern of poor 

decision-making, but complainant offered no evidence of similar misconduct related 

20 

to his most serious violation and no evidence of any prior credential discipline. 

Respondent presented numerous letters of support from colleagues and letters of 

gratitude from students. His performance reviews at Golden Valley and subsequent 

schools were positive. A public reproval of respondent is appropriate and will suffice to 

ensure the protection of students, teachers, and the educational community. 

ORDER 

Respondent Matthew Stanley Sorensen is hereby publicly reproved for 

engaging in unprofessional and immoral conduct, and committing an act of moral 

turpitude. 

DATE: 

HARDEN SOOPER 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings 

21 

