BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the First Amended Accusation Against: 

JONATHAN JAY WRIGHT, Respondent. 

Agency Case No. 2-109848346 

OAH No. 2022090420 

PROPOSED DECISION 

David B. Rosenman, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ), Office of Administrative 

Hearings (OAH), State of California, heard this matter by videoconference March 20-

24, 2023. 

Complainant was represented by Diana Petikyan, Deputy Attorney General. 

Respondent Jonathan Jay Wright was present and was represented by Rothschild 

Wishek & Sands LLP, by Stephen B. Plesser, attorney. 

Oral and documentary evidence was received. The record closed and the matter 

was submitted for decision on March 24, 2023. 

Amendment, Redactions, and Motions 

During the hearing, complainant made a motion to amend the First Amended 

Accusation, found in Exhibit 1, at page A51, line 18, to change the date “January 14, 

2011,” to “January 25, 2011.” There was no objection by respondent. The amendment 

was allowed. 

Certain information in Exhibits U and W was redacted during the hearing to 

protect privacy or confidentiality. Exhibit 27, a video recording, is sealed by separate 

protective order, to protect privacy or confidentiality. 

Respondent filed prehearing motions and complainant filed an opposition brief, 

found in Exhibit 1. The rulings summarized below are explained in more detail on the 

record, and such explanations are incorporated by reference. Respondent’s request for 

bifurcation of certain issues and objections to certain evidence unless other evidence 

was first introduced were denied/overruled without prejudice. In further consideration 

of the entire record, the request is denied, and the objections are overruled. There was 

sufficient evidence of an independent basis for possible discipline of respondent’s 

credentials for the reasons alleged in paragraph 13 of the First Amended Accusation, 

so as to consider the evidence of allegations of prior misconduct, as alleged in 

paragraph 14 of the First Amended Accusation. Respondent’s blanket objection to 

hearsay evidence was denied without prejudice to respondent raising hearsay 

objections during the hearing. Hearsay objections were ruled upon during the hearing 

and on the record. Respondent’s request to admit character witness testimony was not 

opposed and was granted. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Jurisdictional Matters 

1. 

The California Commission on Teacher Credentialing (Commission) issued 

to respondent the following four credentials: 

2 

A. 

On April 1, 2004, a Clear Designated Subjects Supervision and 

Coordination Credential, which expired on October 1, 2012. It was reissued on October 

16, 2015, and was in full force and effect at times relevant to the charges brought in 

the First Amended Accusation and will expire on November 1, 2027, unless renewed. 

B. 

On July 20, 2017, a Certificate of Eligibility Administrative Services 

Credential, which does not expire and allows respondent to seek employment in an 

administrative position. 

C. 

On December 12, 2005, a Clear Single Subject Teaching Credential, in 

English. It was in full force and effect at all times relevant to the charges brought in the 

First Amended Accusation and will expire on January 1, 2026, unless renewed. 

D. 

On September 1, 2002, a Clear Designated Subjects Vocational Education 

Teaching Credential: Full Time, in multimedia production, which expired on October 1, 

2012. The Clear Designated Subjects Vocational Education Teaching Credential: Full 

Time was reissued on October 9, 2012, was in full force and effect at times relevant to 

the charges brought in the First Amended Accusation, and will expire on November 1, 

2027, unless renewed. 

2. 

There was no evidence of prior discipline or adverse action by the 

Commission against these credentials. 

3. 

The Accusation and First Amended Accusation refer to other credentials 

issued to respondent which expired prior to the events alleged therein. These 

credentials are not relevant. 

/// 

/// 

3 

4. 

Complainant Mary Vixie Sandy, Ed.D., brought the Accusation and the 

First Amended Accusation solely in her official capacity as Executive Director of the 

Commission. 

5. 

Prior to the filing of the Accusation, at its meeting January 20-22, 2021, 

the Commission’s Committee of Credentials determined probable cause existed for an 

adverse action against respondent. Respondent was notified of this determination and 

requested an administrative hearing. Complainant then filed the Accusation. 

6. 

After receiving the Accusation, respondent filed a Notice of Defense and 

requested an administrative hearing. 

7. 

All jurisdictional requirements have been met. 

Alleged Causes for Discipline 

8. 

In the First Amended Accusation, complainant alleges respondent’s 

credentials should be disciplined for unprofessional conduct, immoral conduct, evident 

unfitness for service, and persistent defiance of and refusal to obey laws and duties of 

a school district employee, all pursuant to Education Code (Code) section 44421, and 

for acts of moral turpitude, pursuant to Code sections 44421 and 44345, subdivision 

(e). These causes are all based on allegations relating to an incident involving 

respondent that occurred on October 22, 2019, discussed in more detail below (First 

Amended Accusation, paragraph 13), and also on allegations there were prior 

disciplinary actions taken against respondent from 2011 through 2019 that also violate 

these Code sections (First Amended Accusation, paragraph 14). Complainant also 

alleges “disciplinary considerations” consisting of respondent’s criminal convictions in 

2002 and 2012 for alcohol-related violations of the Vehicle Code (First Amended 

Accusation, paragraphs 21 and 22). 

4 

9. 

As noted in more detail in Legal Conclusions 15 and 16, the “prior 

disciplinary actions” are not considered as separate bases for adverse action against 

respondent’s credentials. However, under California Code of Regulations, title 5 

(Regulation), section 80300, subdivision (b)(6), prior notice, warnings, or reprimands 

can be considered as aggravating factors relating to the level of adverse action to be 

imposed, if any. 

10. 

As noted in more detail in Factual Finding 34 and Legal Conclusion 17, 

the criminal convictions are not relevant, even as “disciplinary considerations.” 

However, factual findings are made because the criminal convictions were included in 

the Committee of Credentials’ investigation reports as possible bases for adverse 

action against respondent’s credentials, even though they are not pleaded in the First 

Amended Accusation as bases for adverse action or discipline. 

INCIDENT ON OCTOBER 22, 2019 

11. 

Respondent began teaching at the Alternative Education Center (AEC) 

within the Chino Valley Unified School District (District) during the 2014 to 2015 

academic year. Students at AEC are enrolled in one or two independent study classes 

at a time and are expected to complete a class in about 20 days. The student and 

teacher of each class have an agreement regarding the coursework to be completed. 

Each student is assigned to a homeroom teacher who acts as a case manager for the 

student and monitors his or her class agreements and attendance. Attendance for 

purposes of state funding is based on the completion of classes and not physical 

attendance. 

12.  On October 22, 2019, homeroom teacher Mary Hancock gave student 

S.A. a form to be signed by respondent, who was S.A.’s teacher for a course in 

5 

cartooning. (Initials are used to protect the identity of students who may still be 

minors.) Respondent refused to sign the form. Hancock and S.A. went into 

respondent’s classroom to further discuss the form. Hancock requested respondent 

sign the form. Respondent refused to sign the form and ordered Hancock and S.A. to 

leave the classroom. Respondent either pitched his body backwards or moved 

backwards, then tripped over his chair, fell, and hit his head on the cabinetry. 

Respondent then called 911, falsely reported Hancock caused him to fall, and stated 

he was in fear for his life. Respondent also falsely reported Hancock had a large 

swelling or bulge in her abdomen and he thought she may have a gun or knife. Police 

and paramedics responded to the scene. The police determined Hancock did not 

cause respondent to fall, and Hancock was not arrested. Without the permission of 

Hancock or S.A., respondent recorded on his cell phone portions of the incident, 

including respondent’s interaction and dialogue with Hancock and S.A. Following the 

incident, respondent was placed on paid administrative leave. Respondent then 

resigned pending an investigation by the District. 

13. 

Factual Finding 9 is based on the clear and convincing evidence as it 

relates to the allegations in paragraph 13 of the First Amended Accusation. Other 

evidence established a broader context to the incident. The relevant evidence is 

summarized below. 

14. 

Respondent raised complaints about interruptions and disruptions by 

teachers and administrators coming into his classroom. He raised these complaints for 

many years, in many ways, including oral and written complaints to the interrupting 

teachers and administrators, to his different Department chairpersons over the years, 

and to other administrators. He sometimes relied upon language in a collective 

bargaining agreement relating to working in an environment without interruptions. 

6 

Some later examples of emails by respondent in evidence regarding these subjects are 

from October 2018 (Exhibit D) through early the day of the incident, October 22, 2019 

(Exhibit O), and include, without limitation, Exhibits E, F, G, and L. Respondent testified, 

for example, he had established a TV studio in his classroom where students would 

broadcast daily announcements and do other programming, and people entering his 

class could interrupt those programs, or even interrupt exams he was giving. 

15. 

In a vacuum, these interruptions would appear to be overly disruptive. 

However, testimony and documents from other District employees established the 

teaching atmosphere at the AEC was markedly different than in traditional schools and 

classrooms. Classroom interruptions by teachers, staff, probation officers, and 

administrators were a common occurrence, and tolerated by everyone, except for 

respondent. The number of times respondent was interrupted, as depicted in his 

complaints and testimony, in fact support these interruptions as commonplace 

occurrences such that the people making the interruptions could consider them as the 

standard operating procedure. Nevertheless, respondent continued to bristle, 

complain, and send numerous emails on the subject. Respondent was particularly irked 

by prior interruptions of his class by Hancock. 

16. 

To understand the broader context of the events just before. Hancock 

and S.A. went to respondent’s classroom, respondent claimed S.A. had not attended 

respondent’s cartooning class for more than four weeks and respondent reported the 

absence to Hancock, who was S.A.’s homeroom teacher. In S.A.’s interview with Brenes, 

he told Brenes he had finished the work and showed it to respondent. Respondent 

incorrectly believed, after four weeks of non-attendance, S.A. was automatically 

dropped from the course. (See respondent’s email dated October 3, 2019, Exhibit Z.) 

However, it would take action by Hancock as S.A.’s homeroom teacher for that to 

7 

occur. On October 22, 2019, respondent sent S.A. to Hancock with a blank form – a 

New Course Assignment Request, or NCAR - for her to fill out for S.A. to re-enroll. 

When S.A. came to the homeroom with his work for the cartooning class, Hancock was 

happy to see he was in school and wanted to get respondent to sign the bottom of a 

different, filled in, NCAR form to show that S.A. had completed the course. Hancock 

acknowledged in her testimony at the administrative hearing that although she 

reviewed S.A.’s work, she did not know if it satisfied all of the course requirements. 

Because Hancock believed S.A. had completed the course, she sent S.A. back to 

respondent with the request respondent sign the NCAR indicating course completion. 

Respondent did not believe all the work for the course was completed and testified he 

also believed some of the work was done by another person, not S.A. Respondent 

believed S.A. needed to be re-enrolled, therefore he thought Hancock needed to 

complete a new NCAR for that purpose. The conclusion there was this 

misunderstanding comes from review of all of the evidence. However, the evidence 

also shows that neither respondent nor Hancock communicated that day such that 

they knew there was this misunderstanding. 

17. 

Before going to respondent’s classroom, Hancock called his classroom, 

but respondent did not answer the call. Hancock went to the available administrator, 

Teresa Moore, discussed the matter, and followed Moore’s direction to take the filled-

in NCAR form to respondent. Hancock notified a security officer, Nancy Weibelt, and 

asked her to also come to respondent’s classroom. Weibelt declined. 

18.  When respondent saw Hancock and S.A. enter his classroom, he also 

believed he saw Weibelt walking back and forth by his door. He became nervous. He 

testified he told Hancock he was going to record her, and contends she gave tacit 

consent by staying in his room. Neither Hancock nor S.A., in their interviews with 

8 

Brenes or elsewhere, confirmed respondent’s statement about recording. In the 

summary of respondent’s interview, Brenes wrote respondent admitted recording the 

interactions without their consent. (Exhibit 24, p. A258.) There was no discussion of 

S.A.’s work for the class, just a back and forth about signing the form as well as 

respondent’s direction to Hancock to follow procedures (apparently based on his 

belief S.A. had been dropped from the course) and to leave his room. Respondent 

stated to Brenes his comment to the 911 operator about Hancock having a gun or a 

knife was an attempt to be humorous. 

19. 

Respondent’s video recording of the encounter that was received in 

evidence, Exhibit 27, does not include aspects of the incident that were acknowledged 

as having occurred, including respondent’s statements to the 911 operator he had 

been attacked by a teacher, he suspected she had a gun or a knife, and he was in fear 

for his life. After the Sheriff’s Deputies arrived, respondent told Deputy Garcia he had 

been hit in the face with the NCAR form or that Hancock had pushed him. After 

Deputy Garcia viewed the video, she questioned the accuracy of these statements, and 

respondent recanted them. 

20. 

As noted in more detail below, respondent’s habits of complaining to 

and about colleagues, staff, and administrators, and sending numerous lengthy, 

sometimes confrontational emails, often resulted in complaints by others that 

respondent created a hostile work environment, and directives to respondent to 

change his behavior. 

/// 

/// 

/// 

9 

PRIOR NOTICES, WARNINGS, AND REPRIMANDS BY RESPONDENT’S 

EMPLOYERS 

21. 

After the October 22, 2019 incident, the District conducted an 

investigation based on Hancock’s two complaints, the first relating to that incident, 

and the second that respondent created a hostile work environment at AEC. Isabel 

Brenes, Ed.D., the District’s Director of Human Resources, conducted the investigation 

and prepared a report. (Exhibit 8.) The report refers to 52 attachments, mostly 

summaries of Brenes’s interviews of teachers, staff, administrators, students, and 

respondent, as well as document summaries and descriptions of videos. Only a handful 

of these attachments were submitted in evidence at the administrative hearing. 

However, many of the attachments were summarized in the Commission’s Committee 

of Credentials’ Confidential Investigative Report and Confidential Investigative Report 

#2. (Exhibit 24.) Although some of the Committee’s summaries may be double and 

perhaps triple hearsay (oral statements made to Brenes, summarized in her report, 

then summarized in the Committee’s report), no objections were raised. In some 

instances, the statements were not received for the truth of the matters asserted and, 

therefore, are not hearsay. In several instances direct evidence (testimony and 

documents) was consistent with and confirmed the substance and accuracy of the 

summaries of the statements. The consistency of reporting of events and 

communications by several interviewees, as depicted in the summaries, also lends 

trustworthiness to the summaries by Brenes and the Committee. Hearsay evidence 

may be used in administrative hearings but only to supplement or explain other 

evidence. (Gov. Code § 11513, subd. (d).) Such evidence, referred to as administrative 

hearsay, may be combined with other evidence to provide substantial evidence 

sufficient to support a factual finding. (Komizu v. Gourley (2002) 103 Cal.App.4th 1001.) 

10 

22. 

Brenes summarized numerous prior warnings, letters, and actions taken 

against respondent, and other events, alleged in paragraph 14 of the First Amended 

Accusation and discussed in more detail below. Written documentation of those 

actions was received in evidence as well as the testimony of several authors and others 

involved in the events, including respondent’s testimony and his written responses 

regarding some of the events. Brenes’s summaries were accurate. 

23. 

During Brenes’s investigation, the District learned of the prior notices, 

warnings, and reprimands taken against respondent and other events, discussed in 

Factual Findings 24-33 below. 

24A.  From 2003 to 2012, respondent was employed as an instructor for the 

District at Boys Republic High School (Boys Republic), a juvenile placement facility for 

boys who are placed on probation by the court. Many of the boys are prohibited from 

exhibiting gang behavior as a part of their probation. Students live on campus where 

staff includes probation officers and security guards. Staff are responsible for the well-

being of the students. On January 25, 2011, respondent received a letter from Richard 

“Rick” Landorf, the principal, not a “Conference Summary” as alleged. (First Amended 

Accusation, paragraph 14a.) The letter concerned respondent’s use of a staff radio to 

“broadcast a false police radio call to check a vehicle license, for back up, to release 

the dogs, etc.” (Exhibit 11.) Respondent was instructed not to use the staff radio for 

any reason. 

24B.  The letter noted respondent had expressed remorse for the broadcast, 

and Landorf was concerned the radio call could create confusion if other staff heard 

the call and might have called 911; however, this was not the case “and no real harm 

was done.” (Exhibit 11.) In the letter, Landorf encouraged respondent “to think about 

the possible ramification that may occur when you act without thinking,” that Landorf 

11 

considered this a local issue, and the letter would not be placed in respondent’s 

District file. (Ibid.) 

24C.  Respondent explained the radio call was part of a joke with a student 

with whom he had joked before. Respondent did a “radio check” as he had been 

taught while in the military and thought there was no one on the radio channel 

because there was no response to his radio check. Respondent later learned other staff 

had heard the broadcast and thought it was humorous. 

24D.  Landorf credibly testified the campus at Boys Republic was sprawling and 

included a farm, 12 classrooms, seven dormitories/cottages for students, housing and 

administrative offices for staff, a barn, a gym, and a pool. Treatment of the juveniles 

was the first priority, over their education, and the students were present for varying 

periods of time, at the direction of their probation officers or the courts. Staff and 

probation officers “constantly” entered classrooms for various purposes. 

24E.  Respondent was at Boys Republic when Landorf arrived as the principal 

in 2008. Generally, Landorf would speak informally with teachers, including 

respondent, when issues arose; however, he later found it necessary to document 

some of the instances. Concerning the radio call, Landorf’s secretary heard it and 

identified respondent’s voice. Landorf noted the Boys Republic campus was open, with 

no fences or gates, but there were security officers with radios. There were no dogs on 

campus at that time. Landorf stated he had not written a conference summary for any 

situation with a teacher before this time, but his strategy of talking with respondent 

“was not working” so he “was at a point where I said I’d write it up as an ‘in-house’ 

matter.” 

/// 

12 

24F.  Respondent’s conduct regarding the radio call as established by the clear 

and convincing evidence amounts to unprofessional conduct. Respondent’s conclusion 

there was no one on the radio channel was proven false, and there was no evidence 

others would be aware of the nature of the radio check process respondent had 

learned in the military. Landorf’s concerns were well-taken. 

25A.  On September 18, 2012, respondent received a Conference Summary 

from Landorf concerning inappropriate pictures taken with new cameras obtained for 

use by respondent’s students. (Exhibit 12.) (First Amended Accusation, paragraph 14b.) 

The pictures showed students “flashing gang signs and posturing on campus in the 

pictures – a possible violation of their probation.” (Ibid.) Respondent was “immediately 

apologetic and showed remorse.” (Ibid.) In their discussion, Landorf was not satisfied 

with some of respondent’s answers. Landorf advised respondent he must supervise in 

person students’ activities while taking pictures “to avoid inappropriate pictures. 

[Respondent] acknowledged the importance of the conversation and assured me it 

would not happen again.” (Ibid.) 

25B.  Respondent described certain video and photographic projects by 

students, including work on a “blue book” for students ready to complete their time at 

Boys Republic and who had earned the privilege. Students who earned “citizenship” 

status for good performance and behavior had special privileges and were allowed to 

get a blue book and to use video and still cameras around campus to compile images 

for a blue book. Respondent typically had not directly supervised those activities but 

would review the work before it was distributed for any purpose. With respect to these 

specific photographs, respondent stated some of his students worked on a project for 

another teacher, who had a printer while respondent did not. The students printed the 

subject pictures and later showed them to respondent. Respondent recalled he viewed 

13 

one student giving a “reverse V for victory” hand sign, which he did not recognize as a 

gang sign. Although respondent had not been present at all times when photographs 

and videos were taken by students, he understood Landorf’s concerns and agreed to 

provide direct supervision, even though the effect was to greatly reduce the freedom 

previously allowed for gathering blue book content or other photographic or video 

projects. 

25C.  Landorf testified credibly this was a serious situation, as the students 

could have been removed from Boys Republic and returned to juvenile hall for a 

violation of probation. Landorf was unsure whether he saw respondent in one of the 

pictures. The citizenship and blue book processes and privileges were outside of 

official education operations and were implemented by treatment staff. In meeting 

with respondent, Landorf was concerned the situation not be repeated, so he required 

respondent to directly supervise the activity. 

25D.  Respondent’s conduct regarding the photograph with gang signs as 

established by the clear and convincing evidence amounts to unprofessional conduct. 

Respondent’s trust of students who earned citizenship and had camera privileges was 

too broad considering the risk such conduct, that might otherwise seem relatively 

innocuous, could have serious ramifications. Although respondent’s actions and 

motives were well-intentioned, the students were enrolled at Boys Republic due to 

their risky and illegal behavior and more direct supervision, or other safeguards, 

should have been in place. Landorf’s concerns were well-taken. 

26A.  On October 5, 2012, respondent received a Conference Summary from 

Landorf concerning respondent’s relationship with students and “treatment staff.” 

(Exhibit 13.) The allegation in paragraph 14c in the First Amended Accusation 

incorrectly refers to this as “treatment of staff.” The Conference Summary related to a 

14 

meeting during which Landorf gave instructions to respondent, including that he was 

not to “attempt to teach, explain, or discuss with your students gang signs, language, 

gang clothing, and affiliations, etc.” which were better taught by other staff. (Id. at p. 

A205). Landorf also instructed respondent “to stop sharing with your students private 

issues that have occurred between you and me or BR staff.” (Ibid.) 

26B.  Landorf testified credibly about the meeting, which lasted over one hour, 

and some of the underlying circumstances. However, his testimony did not directly 

provide additional background to the two parts of the meeting and Conference 

Summary which are the subjects of the allegation. Landorf also discussed with 

respondent the steps of progressive discipline which, starting with a verbal warning, 

can continue to a Conference Summary, Warning Latter, Formal Letter of Reprimand, 

and Transfer/Termination. Landorf stated respondent appeared to understand his 

concerns and agreed to make changes. 

26C.  Respondent testified at the administrative hearing about some of his 

statements to students and that he was kidding and thought he was being funny in 

making the comments, but later realized it was not humorous and it would be better 

to not joke with students or staff. 

26D.  Respondent’s conduct as alleged in the October 5, 2012 Conference 

Summary and as established by the clear and convincing evidence amounts to 

unprofessional conduct. While additional facts would place this conduct in a broader 

context, the subjects alone - that is, respondent discussing with his students topics 

relating to gangs and subjects that were private between respondent and Landorf or 

staff – are of a nature that respondent should not have discussed them with students. 

Landorf’s concerns were well-taken. 

15 

27A.  On January 31, 2013, respondent received a Letter of Warning of 

Unprofessional Conduct from Landorf concerning inappropriate communication with 

his supervisor. (Exhibit 14.) (First Amended Accusation, paragraph 14d.) Specifically, 

during a meeting with Landorf, Boys Republic Associate Director Lance Parks, Boys 

Republic Executive Director Chris Burns, and another schoolteacher, respondent stated, 

“I’m going to just say it, yep (pause) here goes. I think at times, Mr. Landorf’s head is 

far up Lance’s ass and Lance’s head is far up Mr. Landorf’s ass. Neither one of you 

know what the fuck is going on. Yep! That’s right (pause) I’ve got balls. I don’t care 

what you people think.” (Id. at p. A207.) 

27B.  The Letter of Warning referred to two policies that respondent violated, 

one by the Board and one in the collective bargaining agreement. Landorf also wrote 

that the conduct had a negative effect on morale, impaired respondent’s ability to 

interact with other employees, showed a lack of professional judgment, and raised 

questions of his ability to conduct himself professionally with students. Landorf 

referred to a prior directive for respondent to take time before responding, to reflect 

before answering. 

27C.  Landorf testified the meeting started because respondent had said 

another teacher or staff person was the devil, and staff “had had enough of these 

types of comments.” After respondent’s comments about the locations of people’s 

heads, Landorf ended the meeting, believed he needed to have respondent removed 

from campus, and spoke to two administrators. Respondent remained off campus for 

about four months and Landorf arranged for a substitute teacher. 

27D.  Respondent submitted a written rebuttal including he had arranged the 

meeting to report two inappropriate actions against respondent by a member of the 

staff. (Exhibit GGG.) Respondent believed he had disproven he had done anything 

16 

wrong in the two interactions, yet Landorf did not accept the proof, did not 

acknowledge the wrongdoing by others, and did not vindicate respondent’s position.  

In his rebuttal, respondent wrote that Landorf said respondent was a great teacher yet 

had written up respondent for what respondent considered “false accusations and 

bogus assumptions at least four times,” leading respondent to ask, “who do principals 

answer to?” (Ibid.) Respondent expressed his desire to stay at Boys Republic but was 

concerned Landorf “threatened” to transfer him. 

27E. 

In his testimony at the administrative hearing, respondent admitted 

“wrongdoing” and stated he was at his wits end. This was the “most egregious thing 

I’ve done . . . . I said it, and I apologized. I regret it. I should have taken it back.” 

27F.  Respondent’s conduct as alleged in the January 31, 2013 Letter of 

Warning of Unprofessional Conduct and as established by the clear and convincing 

evidence amounts to unprofessional conduct. 

28A.  On May 31 and June 17, 2013, respondent received Letters of Reprimand 

from two Directors of Human Resources in the District concerning his unprofessional 

conduct with staff and students at Boys Republic. (Exhibits 15 and 16.) (First Amended 

Accusation, paragraph 14e.) The Letters are virtually identical, with the second adding 

a requirement for respondent to complete a fitness for duty exam. Specifically, the 

Letters relate that, on April 26, 2013, respondent left his classroom unattended, pulled 

student L.M. out of class, and took that student to confront another teacher, Marv 

Freeman, regarding a written statement Freeman made. Respondent also sent multiple 

complaint emails to his supervisor, Landorf, culminating in an intense exchange 

between respondent and Landorf, wherein Landorf left because he did not feel safe. 

/// 

17 

28B.  Again, there is broader context beyond the above actions as alleged and 

proven. Respondent was concerned Freeman wrote that another student, identified 

only as M., was doing better because L.M. was no longer in the same class. 

Respondent encouraged L.M. to confront Freeman about this statement. The Letters of 

Reprimand depict L.M. as not wanting the confrontation and agreeing that M. was 

probably doing better after L.M. left because they used to talk together during the 

class. When respondent and L.M. entered, they interrupted Freeman’s class. According 

to Landorf’s testimony, a teacher’s aide in Freeman’s class called the office to report 

respondent was yelling at Freeman. 

28C.  The Letters relate that, on the same day, April 26, 2013, respondent sent 

emails to Landorf and Norm Enfield, the Assistant Superintendent of Human 

Resources, concerning respondent’s complaints about another teacher, Ms. Anleu-

Yates (first name unknown). When Landorf came to discuss the events of the day in 

respondent’s room, he met respondent on an outside patio. Landorf described 

respondent’s eyes as large, and respondent was talking to himself and seemed 

“distressed.” The Letters described respondent as perspiring, shaking, and speaking 

with an elevated voice. Landorf was concerned and called 911. Paramedics and police 

arrived, and Landorf believed staff and students observed them or heard about it. 

Respondent refused medical care. Landorf arranged for respondent’s wife to take him 

home. It was the last time Landorf saw respondent. 

28D.  Respondent admitted in his testimony at the administrative hearing he 

was wrong to confront Freeman with a student and he regrets it. He explained he 

believed it was protocol at Boys Republic to “confront if you see something wrong.” 

Respondent described L.M. as being “in tears” when he saw the statement written by 

Freeman and described Freeman as embarrassed and red-faced. Respondent testified 

18 

the events occurred at about 8:00 a.m. but it was several hours later that the police 

arrived. 

28E.  The Letters of Reprimand noted respondent had a history of 

demonstrating a lack of judgment and had been admonished multiple times for 

unprofessional conduct. The Letters included that respondent violated Board policies 

regarding intimidation or harassment of a student, ensuring the safety of students, 

other policies, as well as the collective bargaining agreement. “Your poor judgment 

has created an unsafe and hostile educational and work environment, . . . has a 

deleterious effect on your credibility and undermines your ability to provide effective 

supervision to students and collaborative professional relationships with staff.” (Exhibit 

16, p. A213.) 

28F.  Respondent’s conduct as alleged in the May 31 and June 17, 2013, 

Letters of Reprimand and as established by the clear and convincing evidence 

amounts to unprofessional conduct. 

29. 

It is alleged in paragraph 14 of the First Amended Accusation: “f. On July 

1, 2013, Respondent received a change of assignment from Boys Republic to Ayala 

High School, effective for the 2013-2014 academic year”; and “g. On January 5, 2015, 

Respondent was administratively transferred from Ayala High School to the AEC.” The 

change of assignment and the transfer were established by clear and convincing 

evidence; however, it was not established these two actions are considered “prior 

disciplinary actions,” as also alleged therein. 

30A.  On February 3, 2016, respondent received a Conference Summary from 

Preston Carr, Ed.D., the Director of the AEC, for creating a hostile work environment, 

19 

“based on disparaging treatment as a result of emails sent to [two] teachers.” (Exhibit 

19.) (First Amended Accusation, paragraph 14h.) 

30B.  Carr described respondent as likeable at first, and there arose “good 

moments, bad moments.” Later, there were “challenges” to working with him. Carr 

explained his preference was to have informal discussions about issues instead of 

formal write ups. Carr testified respondent got upset and irritated with people and 

sent them numerous emails. Carr had given numerous verbal warnings to respondent, 

and then instructed that he should send drafts of emails to Carr’s secretary, Kim, for 

review and approval before the emails were sent to teachers or staff. 

30C.  The specific emails respondent sent to teachers Antonio Montanez and 

Bob Morey referenced in the February 3, 2016 Conference Summary, although 

relatively tame, nevertheless caused Montanez to feel respondent had disparaged his 

character, and the email to Morey was, according to Carr, based on “accusations and 

unnecessary comments to your colleagues.” (Exhibit 19, p. A217.) Carr included that 

respondent had sent an email to Kim for review that was “accusatory and needed 

some filtering prior to sending . . . .” (Ibid.) Respondent was directed to cease sending 

negative emails, maintain a professional response to staff and students, and not to 

“engage in matters that are not directly related to your job as a teacher.” (Ibid.)  

30D.  Respondent explained in his testimony some problems arose when he 

was assigned new students as their homeroom teacher but the prior homeroom 

teachers to these students were not informed and continued to function as their 

course managers. Respondent did not realize this at first. He acknowledged some of 

his emails were accusatory. Of note, with respect to the reference to the email that Kim 

had reviewed, respondent’s interpretation was that he was being “dinged” for having 

followed the very procedure Carr had instituted. It escaped him that Kim had reviewed 

20 

the email and found it to be accusatory and required filtering, despite respondent 

being instructed previously to avoid writing this type of email. 

30E.  Respondent’s conduct as alleged in the February 3, 2016 Conference 

Summary and as established by the clear and convincing evidence amounts to 

unprofessional conduct. 

31A.  On May 24, 2016, respondent received a Letter of Reprimand from Carr 

for again creating a hostile work environment, “by sending negative emails toward 

staff […], lack of judgment, and not adhering to administrative directives.” (Exhibit 20, 

p. A219.) (First Amended Accusation, paragraph 14i.) 

31B.  Carr explained in his testimony that other teachers’ concerns about 

respondent varied depending on circumstances. He referred to an incident when a 

teacher entered a parking lot against a directional sign and respondent overreacted by 

“berating” and yelling at her. Respondent complained about a custodian parking in a 

particular area or leaving his cart somewhere or spraying his classroom. Carr told 

respondent these were not his problems. Carr testified that the issue was the way 

respondent handled the situations. It took little for respondent to become “furious” at 

people. 

31C.  Respondent described Carr as often being absent from campus and not 

aware of the full circumstances surrounding events and interactions. He did not 

believe Carr was an effective administrator. Respondent testified he was following 

policies and procedures and was seeking input and direction, but it often was not 

made available to him. 

/// 

21 

31D.  Respondent’s conduct as alleged in the May 24, 2016 Letter of 

Reprimand and as established by the clear and convincing evidence amounts to 

unprofessional conduct. 

32A.  On January 7, 2019, respondent received a Conference Summary from 

Carr concerning unlawfully recording a meeting, directing respondent to refrain from 

using devices to record meetings without permission. (Exhibit 21.) (First Amended 

Accusation, paragraph 14 j.) 

32B.  Respondent sought to have minutes prepared of departmental staff 

meetings so he could be clear about policies and directions discussed in the meetings. 

(See, e.g., respondent’s email October 10, 2018, Exhibit RR.) No meeting minutes had 

been prepared. Respondent testified he was frustrated by the lack of minutes to use as 

a resource for policies and other department actions. Respondent had some difficulty 

handwriting notes after he had broken his thumb. He explained he had been using a 

computer program to transcribe the meeting and would make his notes available to 

the participants. On December 1, 2018, respondent sent an email to Carr about his 

attempt to use this computer program, in the context of a class respondent was taking 

for his doctorate degree, to transcribe a staff meeting. Respondent related various 

problems he encountered, such as the lack of identifying different speakers and some 

inaccuracies in wording. (Exhibit F.) Respondent wrote he encouraged people “to 

record the audio first and then transcribe them to text.” (Id. at p. B9.) 

32C.  Hancock, as Department chair, received complaints by others about 

respondent recording the departmental staff meeting on November 30, 2018, and sent 

an email to Carr making a formal complaint of recording without consent. (Ex. 28, p. 

A424.) 

22 

32D. 

In this context, respondent’s testimony he did not use his computer to 

record the meeting but, rather, to take notes, is unconvincing. 

32E.  Respondent’s conduct as alleged in the January 7, 2019 Conference 

Summary and as established by the clear and convincing evidence amounts to 

unprofessional conduct. 

33A.  On March 7, 2019, respondent received a Conference Summary from Carr 

concerning the disruptive use of email contrary to District policy, and directing 

respondent to, among other things, cease from making inappropriate verbal or written 

contact with staff. (Exhibit 22.) (First Amended Accusation, paragraph 14 k.) 

33B. 

In the Conference Summary, Carr listed six emails from respondent, from 

February 7-14, 2019, regarding various subject matters, deemed by Carr as 

inappropriate, a disruptive use of time, or beyond respondent’s responsibilities as a 

teacher. Carr directed respondent to take steps “prior to sending emails based on 

assumptions, emotions, and allegations without processing the concerns which often 

can be resolved with a conversation either the next day or a few hours later. [⁋] The 

emails are consuming the staff with ongoing [sic] and disruptive to the learning 

environment, . . . are often judgmental, [and] you again took part in email and other 

communications that create an unfriendly, unprofessional and negative work 

environment. Sending accusatory and negative emails and not following directives are 

unprofessional.” (Exhibit 22, pp. A225-A225.) 

33C.  Carr testified some of these emails and subjects had been discussed with 

respondent multiple times. He referred to these and other emails as containing 

condescending remarks or as silly, negative, or unnecessary. Respondent continued to 

complain of people disrupting his classes, which interruptions Carr described as 

23 

something that usually happens at AEC. Respondent continued to use bold or 

capitalized letters even after he was informed it was not received well and should be 

avoided. Respondent continued to involve himself in things Carr believed were 

“outside his lane.” Although individually some of these practices might be considered 

trivial or of limited impact, their combined effects, and the failure and seeming 

inability of respondent to comply with directives, created an ongoing difficult and 

hostile environment. In the context as he described, Carr’s concerns were well taken. 

33D.  Respondent testified he did not feel he “was being heard” and that Carr 

unfairly characterized all of his emails as negative. Respondent stated he was trying to 

seek clarifications re policies. Respondent would request meetings for discussion but 

was not accommodated. Respondent was concerned that others were not 

recommending students to take his classes. 

33E.  Respondent’s conduct as alleged in the March 7, 2019 Conference 

Summary and as established by the clear and convincing evidence amounts to 

unprofessional conduct. 

“DISCIPLINARY CONSIDERATIONS” 

34. 

In paragraphs 21 and 22 of the First Amended Accusation, complainant 

alleges, as “Disciplinary Considerations,” respondent had criminal convictions in 2002 

and 2012 for violating Vehicle Code section 23152 by driving after consuming alcohol. 

These allegations are not referenced in any of the five alleged causes for discipline. 

There was no authority cited by complainant authorizing the use of these “Disciplinary 

Considerations,” and the criminal convictions do not satisfy any of the aggravating 

factors in Regulation, section 80300, subdivision (b), cited in paragraph 11 of the First 

Amended Accusation. Nor do they comport with any of the “relationship factors” in 

24 

Regulation, section 80302, subdivision (a), cited in paragraph 12 of the First Amended 

Accusation. Nevertheless, as the criminal convictions are included in the investigation 

reports of the Committee of Credentials and have been included in the First Amended 

Accusation, Factual Findings on them follow. 

35.  On March 8, 2002, respondent was convicted, on his plea of guilty, of 

violating Vehicle Code section 23152, subdivision (b), driving under the influence of 

alcohol with a blood alcohol content of 0.08 percent or greater, a misdemeanor. 

(People v. Wright, San Bernardino Superior Court, 2002, case no. TWV033517.) 

Pronouncement of judgment was withheld, and respondent was placed on summary 

probation for three years on terms and conditions, including that he pay fines and fees 

and complete a first offender alcohol education program. On July 29, 2013, the court 

granted respondent’s petition and ordered his plea set aside, and the complaint was 

dismissed. 

36.  On March 19, 2012, respondent was convicted, on his plea of nolo 

contendere, of violating Vehicle Code section 23152, subdivision (a), driving under the 

influence of alcohol with a prior offense, a misdemeanor. (People v. Wright, San 

Bernardino Superior Court, 2012, case no. TWC1002642.) Pronouncement of judgment 

was withheld, and respondent was placed on summary probation for three years on 

terms and conditions, including that he serve 90 days in county jail (with credit for two 

days), pay fines and fees, and complete a multiple offender alcohol education 

program. On July 1, 2012, the court granted respondent’s petition and ordered his 

plea set aside, and the complaint was dismissed. 

/// 

/// 

25 

Other Evidence in Support of Discipline 

37. 

Dory Prieto was a counselor at AEC. In Brenes’s summary of Prieto’s 

interview, Prieto reported she has moved students from respondent’s homeroom 

because parents informed her their students felt uncomfortable with respondent and 

that emails or calls from respondent to parents were very aggressive. (Exhibit 24, pp. 

A249-A250.) Prieto sent a letter to S.A.’s parents on the date of the October 22, 2019 

incident indicating he witnessed a potentially traumatic event. (See reference to exhibit 

V to Brenes’s report in Exhibit 8, p. A182, and Exhibit 28, p. A405.) S.A. submitted a 

report and incident statement about the incident. (See reference to exhibit X in 

Brenes’s report in Exhibit 8, p. A183.) Neither the letter nor the incident report was 

submitted in evidence. 

38. 

Brenes’s investigative report, Exhibit 24, includes summaries of her 

interviews with 16 teachers, staff, and administrators at Boys Republic and AEC. As 

those interviews are summarized in the report of the Committee of Credentials, the 

overwhelming majority of these interviewees reported, at a minimum, strained 

relationships with respondent, with many encounters unexpectedly escalating to 

respondent yelling at them. They reported respondent as being angry and hostile, 

bullying, unprofessional, and sending multiple emails that were accusatory or 

upsetting. These interviews are consistent with other direct evidence and supplement 

and explain the evidence relating to the history of respondent receiving warnings, 

letters of reprimand, and conference summaries. 

Respondent’s Background; Other Relevant Evidence 

39. 

Respondent is 55 years old. He was born and raised in Minnesota and 

attended a university there for two years before he moved to California to work as an 

26 

actor. Respondent then enlisted in the Army, was on active duty from 1990 to 1992, 

and received an honorable discharge. He then served in the Army Reserve, first in 

Minnesota from 1992 to 1997, then in California until 2002. Respondent was awarded 

a Bachelor of Arts in film and television production in 1995 from Metropolitan State 

University in Minnesota and obtained a teaching credential from Concordia University 

in Minnesota. He received a Master of Arts in education in 2017 and a Doctor of 

Education (Ed.D.) in 2021 from Concordia University, Irvine. 

40. 

Respondent started his teaching career as a teacher assistant at a middle 

school in Minnesota from 1992 to 1997. From 1997 to 1999 he was a high school 

instructor in Rancho Cucamonga. Respondent came to the District in 1999, where he 

first was an instructor at Don Lugo High School until 2003, when he moved to Boys 

Republic, where he was an instructor through 2012. Respondent then was an instructor 

at Ayala High School from 2012 to 2015, when he moved to the AEC and served as an 

instructor from 2015 to 2019, when he was placed on leave. Respondent resigned from 

the District effective January 31, 2021. 

41. 

For the District, respondent taught English classes and classes in video 

production. From the time of his first teaching assignment in California, respondent 

has provided innovative, engaging instruction and lead special projects involving video 

production and television studio technology and presentation, with projects for 

students, staff, and other district personnel. Respondent testified passionately about 

his interests in student advancement and about video and television production. 

42. 

After leaving the District respondent worked for one year for the Bureau 

of Indian Education at the Sherman Indian School in Riverside, California. He then had 

the opportunity and moved to Guam on a two-year contract through the Department 

of Defense to teach at a school for children of service members. He received excellent 

27 

references from his time at the Sherman Indian School, including high marks for 

collaboration with others and being a team player. (Exhibits EE and FF, supplementing 

and explaining respondent’s testimony.) Before the end of his contract, in November 

2020, respondent returned to California to assist in the daily care of a member of his 

family with medical issues. 

43. 

In January 2021 respondent submitted a written statement to the 

Committee of Credentials as a “supplemental statement to provide more context 

regarding the allegations made against me and the difficulties I faced in my district.” 

(Exhibit CC, p. B62.) In summary, respondent wrote of the difficulties he experienced 

with administrators, Carr in particular, department chairpersons, colleagues, and staff. 

Respondent wrote that he holds people accountable, and people did not like it when 

he reported allegations against them, either his own or complaints from students. 

Respondent found a lack of structure and failure to follow proper operating 

procedures. He highlighted several teachers and staff, in several examples, who did not 

follow procedures and who became upset when he confronted them or brought the 

situations to the attention of supervisors and superiors. Although respondent sought 

solutions to problems, he often experienced disrespectful conduct from others. 

44. 

Respondent explained when Hancock and S.A. entered his classroom on 

October 22, 2019, and would not leave, he wanted a neutral party to remove her. He 

had not received help or support from his department chair or the administration, so 

he called 911. In retrospect he testified he should have just walked out of the room. “I 

can control how I respond but not others’ actions.” He did not want Hancock to be 

arrested; he just wanted her to leave. 

45. 

In its Confidential Investigative Report #2, the Committee on Credentials 

listed several factors in mitigation, including letters of recommendation, emails 

28 

between respondent and others, teacher evaluations, education documents, 

photographs, information on S.A.’s status in the cartooning class, and respondent’s 

Level I Grievance against Carr. (Exhibit 24, p. A314.) Also attached was respondent’s 

written statement dated December 8, 2020, conveying his version of the incident with 

Hancock and S.A. on October 22, 2019. That version was consistent with his belief 

Hancock was trying to have him commit academic fraud by signing the NCAR to 

indicate S.A. had completed the class, and the reasons that respondent felt he had no 

other viable option than to seek help by calling 911. 

46. 

Respondent submitted numerous emails in evidence, many of them 

providing added context to the attempts he made to inform teachers, staff, and 

administrators of issues and problems he perceived and often including his 

suggestions for improvement and requests for help, meetings, or clarification of 

procedures and policies. (See, for example, Exhibits KK, PP, MM, M, N.) In his 

testimony, respondent noted he did not get responses to many of these emails, and 

he felt he was not being heard or respected. As an example, respondent related being 

part of a team tasked with making a presentation, putting in the work to have his part 

prepared, including slides, and then having his portion dropped with no explanation. 

In other instances, respondent felt teachers or counselors were discouraging students 

from taking respondent’s classes. 

47. 

Respondent was proud of his work at Boys Republic, had a good 

relationship with principal Dick Meyers, instituted “shirt and tie Fridays,” and expanded 

the video production and television studio projects to cover numerous school 

activities. 

48. 

Several witnesses testified on respondent’s behalf. Respondent was a 

homeroom teacher for Caira Cabrera from 2018 to 2020 who spent a lot of time with 

29 

her and offered her patience and kindness. She had negative experiences with other 

teachers, including Hancock. Nathaniel Pilate was a student at Boys Republic from 

2005 to 2007 who recalls respondent as enthusiastic and trusting, allowing students to 

explore, very unlike other teachers there. Respondent was “by the book, but not 

without a heart.” Cabrera and Pilate have used skills learned from respondent to 

advance in their careers. Maria Trinci’s son was respondent’s student at Ayala High 

School in 2018, his senior year. Respondent was a strong positive influence who 

helped her son obtain credits to graduate. Trinci’s son had a bad experience in another 

class where the teacher used disparaging remarks about race and did not give credit 

for work submitted. Judy McConnell retired in 2003 after 38 years teaching in the 

District. She has known respondent for more than 30 years and praises him as a 

dedicated teacher who also had good rapport with staff. She did not believe Carr was 

an effective administrator and did not trust him. Michael McDuffie, a county probation 

officer, met respondent at Boys Republic in 2008. They bonded as veterans and, over 

time, became friends. McDuffie characterized respondent as passionate to teach, 

particularly to a student body that was tough to motivate. Ron Rogosheske retired 

from teaching in Minneapolis and has known respondent as his student in elementary 

and high school. They have a shared interest in media communications and have 

stayed friends. While respondent was teaching in high school, he assisted Rogosheske 

in summer programs. Rogosheske praised respondent’s leadership and 

communication with students, and testified respondent had a good way of dealing 

with people. All of these witnesses were aware of the allegations and nevertheless 

spoke on respondent’s behalf. 

49. 

Respondent submitted character-reference letters from Dr. Gayla Mead, a 

counselor at Ayala High School, and Ronald Mead, the principal there. (Exhibits P and 

Q.) The letters were received as administrative hearsay. The letters supplement and 

30 

explain the positive and dedicated efforts respondent demonstrated, as a teacher and 

as a collaborator with other staff. They praised his effectiveness in applying high 

quality instruction to the video productions of students and his devotion to the 

success of his students. 

50. 

Respondent testified he first consulted a therapist in mid-2013 when he 

was instructed to complete a fitness for duty exam as part of his directives from the 

Director of Human Resources. (See Factual Finding 28A.) He saw Dr. Ibarra then, again 

when he left AEC, in 2019, and currently consults as needed. He discussed subjects of 

his issues at school and worked on precipitating events and conflict resolution. This 

work in therapy has changed respondent’s teaching philosophy and made him more 

aware of cultural differences and nuances that affect others’ perceptions of him. 

Respondent realized he let his ego “get in the way,” he was perceived as curt with 

people when he was “a stickler for the rules,” and his sarcasm and humor may have 

been misplaced. By implementing new strategies at the Indian School and in Guam, 

respondent believes he has improved his teaching techniques and effectiveness. And 

respondent realizes he should not send as many emails, “should let things go,” and 

needs to be more careful about what he says to others. 

51. 

Respondent was respectful of the proceedings and spoke with sincerity. 

When asked why he wanted to teach, respondent testified he enjoys sharing 

knowledge with students, to have them take ownership, to help them identify a goal, 

and “let them find their way.” He stated video production classes were a transparent 

tool for learning that help students improve in other subjects. The students were 

“serving stakeholders, digging deeper with digital, and creating collaboration.” He 

“definitely” desires to continue teaching and, based on what he has learned, can be a 

31 

team player even if he disagrees with others. “I will grow and become a better 

educator.” 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

Standard and Burden of Proof 

1. 

In this proceeding based on the First Amended Accusation, complainant 

has the burden to prove its case by clear and convincing evidence to a reasonable 

certainty. (Gardner v. Commission on Professional Competence (1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 

1035.) Therefore, to impose discipline on respondent’s credentials, complainant is 

obligated to adduce evidence that is clear, explicit, and unequivocal; so clear as to 

leave no substantial doubt and sufficiently strong as to command the unhesitating 

assent of every reasonable mind. (In Re Marriage of Weaver (1990) 224 Cal.App.3d 

478.) Clear and convincing evidence has been defined as “[e]vidence of such convincing 

force that it demonstrates, in contrast to the opposing evidence, a high probability of the 

truth of the fact[s] for which it is offered as proof.” (Cal. Civil Jury Instructions [BAJI] 2.62; 

accord, Mattco Forge, Inc. v. Arthur Young & Co. (1997) 52 Cal.App.4th 820, 847.) 

Alleged Bases for Discipline, and Interpretation 

2. 

Pursuant to the Code, commencing with section 44000, and the 

Regulations, commencing with section 80000, the Commission is responsible for 

credentialing teachers in public schools in California, including issuing credentials and 

taking adverse action against applicants and credential holders. “Adverse action” is 

defined in Regulation section 80300, subdivision (a), as “a denial, a private admonition, 

public reproval, suspension or a revocation of one or more credentials.” Under Code 

section 44440, subdivision (c), the Commission has the authority to institute a 

32 

disciplinary proceeding against a credential holder, suspend or revoke the credential, 

or issue a public reproval or private admonition against the credential holder. 

Regulation section 80300, subdivision (t), provides that a suspension may be stayed 

“on condition of probation,” indicating that adverse action may also take the form of 

placing a credential on probation subject to terms. 

3. 

Code section 44421 authorizes the Commission to take adverse action 

against an individual’s teaching credential for immoral conduct, unprofessional 

conduct, for “persistent defiance of, and refusal to obey, the laws regulating the duties 

of persons serving in the public school system,” for any cause that would warrant 

denial of an application, or for evident unfitness for service. 

4. 

Under Code section 44345, subdivision (e), the Commission may deny an 

application if the applicant has committed acts involving moral turpitude. Any such 

denial “shall be based upon reasons related to the applicant's fitness to teach or 

fitness to perform other duties for which that applicant is certificated, or competence 

to perform the duties which the credential would authorize the applicant to perform.” 

5. 

Language similar to some of these statutory grounds is also found in 

Code sections authorizing a school district to terminate the employment of a teacher. 

For example, a teacher may be terminated for unprofessional conduct or for immoral 

conduct, under Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(1). Cases under this Code section 

have discussed and defined these bases for a teacher’s termination of employment 

and are instructive here to help define the bases for discipline of a teaching credential. 

6. 

There is broad discretion in determining what constitutes unfitness to 

teach, in determining what constitutes immoral conduct, and in deciding whether the 

teacher should be sanctioned. (California Teachers Ass’n v. State of California (1999) 20 

33 

Cal.4th 327.) The proven conduct should be looked at in the aggregate. It is not 

necessary to determine if each and every act demonstrates unfitness; it is proper to 

examine the totality of the offensive conduct. “When the camel’s back is broken we 

need not weigh each straw in its load to see which one could have done the deed.” 

(Woodland Joint Unified School Dist. v. Commission on Professional Competence 

(1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1457) (Woodland). 

7. 

Evident unfitness for service properly means “clearly not fit, not adapted 

to or unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of temperamental defects or 

inadequacies. [Fn. omitted.]” (Woodland, supra, 2 Cal.App.4th at p. 1444.) This cause 

for discipline connotes a “fixed character trait, presumably not remediable merely on 

receipt of notice that one’s conduct fails to meet the expectations of the employing 

school district.” (Ibid.) The criteria for unfitness found in Morrison v. State Board of 

Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214 (Morrison), discussed in more detail below, “must be 

analyzed to determine, as a threshold matter, whether the cited conduct indicates 

unfitness for service. [Citation.] If the Morrison criteria indicate unfitness to teach, the 

next step is to determine whether the ‘unfitness’ is ‘evident’; i.e., whether the offensive 

conduct is caused by a defect in temperament. (Woodland, supra, 2 Cal.App.4th at p. 

1445.) For instance, a teacher’s removal of school property (a public address system 

speaker) from the classroom wall may be considered evidence of evident unfitness for 

service. (Palo Verde Unified School Dist. of Riverside County v. Hensey (1970) 9 

Cal.App.3d 967, 973) (Hensey). 

8. 

“Immoral conduct,” pursuant to Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(1), has 

been defined to mean conduct that is willful, flagrant, or shameless, conduct showing 

moral indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the community, and as an 

inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public welfare. It is sometimes used as 

34 

indicating a high degree of unfairness. (Board of Ed. of the San Francisco Unified School 

Dist. v. Weiland (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811 (Weiland); Hensey, supra, 9 Cal.App.3d at 

p. 972.)  

9. 

The factual scenarios in Weiland, Hensey, and other cases are helpful in 

understanding the types of actions that can constitute “immoral conduct” and “evident 

unfitness for service” as bases to dismiss a teacher. By inference, these cases help in 

interpreting similar language regarding grounds to discipline teaching credentials. In 

Weiland, a teacher of an evening class was aware that when the number of students in 

a class was down to 15 for three successive evenings, the class would be automatically 

dropped, and the teacher would lose her position. The teacher testified she falsified 

records by adding the names of three persons who were absent. Although the teacher 

argued that other teachers did the same and she did so “to expose the situation,” 

nevertheless her conduct was not justified, and the evidence established “that the 

purpose of the falsification was to secure appellant’s continued employment. The 

evidence was clearly sufficient to support the findings” of immoral conduct. (Weiland, 

supra, 179 Cal.App.2d at 811.) 

10. 

In Hensey, dismissal was justified for a junior college teacher who used 

vulgar language and engaged in questionable acts in his classes. It was not necessarily 

each individual act or comment but, rather, the totality. The teacher tore out a 

loudspeaker in his classroom. He referred to the school’s bell system as sounding like 

a worn-out phonograph in a whorehouse. He stated the district superintendent spent 

too much time licking up the school board and simulated licking the classroom wall 

with his tongue. Although he explained he meant “face licking,” the expression “means 

in common parlance licking an entirely different portion of the anatomy” and was 

obviously so intended. (Hensey, supra, 9 Cal.App.3d at 974, 975.) The teacher also 

35 

referred to the school walls looking as though someone had peed on them and then 

smeared them with baby crap. The different actions and statements were described as 

creating a dangerous situation (loudspeaker) and bearing on his fitness to teach 

(whorehouse). Other statements showed a lack of restraint and a tendency to vulgarity 

and bad taste. The conduct was disruptive, an impairment of the teaching process, and 

not an example of the responsible dissent which should be fostered in the classroom 

(licking). “All of the incidents taken in the aggregate serve as a substantial basis for the 

trial court’s determination that the charges of ‘immoral conduct’ and ‘evident unfitness 

for service’ were true and constituted cause for dismissal.” (Ibid.) 

11. 

Under Code section 44421, it was not immoral conduct or unfitness for 

service for a college English teacher to use for illustrative purposes a poem containing 

obscenities, slang references to male and female sexual organs and to sexual activity, 

and profane references to Jehovah and Christ, and a brochure containing photographs 

of entwined nude couples suggesting sexual intercourse. (Board of Trustees v. Metzger 

(1972) 8 Cal.3d 206 

12. 

“Unprofessional conduct,” as used in Code section 44932, subdivision 

(a)(l), may be defined as conduct which violates the rules or ethical code of a 

profession or is such conduct that is unbecoming of a member of a profession in good 

standing. (Board of Education of the City of Los Angeles v. Swan (1953) 41 Cal.2d 546, 

553.) “A teacher . . . in the public school system is regarded by the public and pupils in 

the light of an exemplar, whose words and actions are likely to be followed by the 

children coming under her care and protection.” (Id. at p. 552; citations omitted.) 

13. 

As an example, conduct that produced serious friction in the school and 

showed a teacher’s insubordination and refusal to conform to the instructions and 

36 

requirements of superiors has been held to be unprofessional conduct. (Johnson v. 

Taft School Dist. (1937) 19 Cal.App.2d 405, 407.) 

14. 

“Moral turpitude is a concept that ‘defies exact description’ [citation] and 

‘cannot be defined with precision’ [citation].” (In re Grant (2014) 58 Cal.4th 469, 475-

476.) “Our Supreme Court has defined moral turpitude as ‘an act of baseness, vileness 

or depravity in the private and social duties which a man owes to his fellowmen, or to 

society in general, contrary to the accepted and customary rule of right and duty 

between man and man.’ [Citation.] Moral turpitude has also been described as any 

crime or misconduct committed without excuse, or any ‘dishonest or immoral’ act not 

necessarily a crime. [Citation.] The definition depends on the state of public morals 

and may vary according to the community or the times, as well as on the degree of 

public harm produced by the act in question. [Citation.]” (Clerici v. Department of 

Motor Vehicles (1990) 224 Cal.App.3d 1016, 1027; see also Ricasa v. Office of 

Administrative Hearings (2018) 31 Cal.App.5th 262, 281; Golde v. Fox (1979) 98 

Cal.App.3d 167, 185.) Moral turpitude has been defined as “everything done contrary 

to justice, honesty, modesty or good morals.” (Rice v. Alcoholic Beverage etc. Appeals 

Bd. (1979) 89 Cal.App.3d 30, 36.) 

15. 

In each instance in the First Amended Accusation, complainant alleges 

the causes for discipline are based upon respondent’s actions and words on October 

22, 2019, as alleged in paragraph 14, and on “the prior disciplinary actions taken 

against Respondent,” as alleged in paragraph 15. However, those “prior disciplinary 

actions” were not included in the portions of the Committee of Credentials’ 

investigative reports which state, “This probable cause report contains information that 

Respondent may be subject to discipline as a result of the following,” with references 

to only the incident involving Hancock when respondent called 911 and the two 

37 

criminal convictions. (Exhibit 24, see pp. A236-A237 and A276-A277.) Although the 

alleged “prior disciplinary actions” are included in later portions of the investigative 

reports, respondent was not put on proper notice during the investigation that these 

“prior disciplinary actions” were considered by the Committee of Credentials or the 

Commission as separate bases for discipline of his credentials. Their later inclusion in 

the Accusation and First Amended Accusation does not cure the lack of proper notice. 

16. 

The significance of the “prior disciplinary actions” is relevant, however, 

under Regulation section 80300, subdivision (b), as possible aggravating factors in 

considering the degree of adverse action that may be appropriate if a cause for 

discipline has been established. This regulation is discussed in more detail below. 

17. 

As noted in Factual Finding 34, the two prior criminal convictions are not 

pleaded as causes for discipline in the First Amended Accusation. Therefore, the only 

evidence considered in determining whether the five causes for discipline have been 

proven is the evidence related to the October 22, 2019 incident. 

Conclusions on the Causes for Discipline 

18. 

Respondent’s actions and words on October 22, 2019, constitute conduct 

that is unbecoming of a member of the teaching profession in good standing. 

19. 

There is cause to take adverse action against respondent’s credentials 

under Code section 44421 for unprofessional conduct, based on his actions and words 

on October 22, 2019. (See Factual Findings 11 through 19, 37, 44.) 

20. 

Respondent’s actions and words on October 22, 2019, constitute conduct 

showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the community, an 

38 

inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public welfare, and indicate a high 

degree of unfairness. 

21. 

There is cause to take adverse action against respondent’s credentials 

under Code section 44421 for immoral conduct, based on his actions and words on 

October 22, 2019. (See Factual Findings 11 through 19, 37, 44.) 

22. 

Respondent’s actions and words on October 22, 2019, constitute conduct 

that was willful, demonstrated an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the 

public welfare, and were contrary to justice, honesty, or good morals. 

23. 

There is cause to take adverse action against respondent’s credentials 

under Code sections 44345, subdivision (c), and 44421, for committing acts of moral 

turpitude, based on his actions and words on October 22, 2019. (See Factual Findings 

11 through 19, 37, 44.) 

24. 

The violations noted above of Code sections 44345, subdivision (c), and 

44421, constitute defiance of, or refusal to obey, the laws regulating the duties of 

persons serving in the public school system, as that language is used in Code section 

44421. However, that Code section requires “persistent defiance of, and refusal to 

obey” such laws. As analyzed above, the gravamen of the First Amended Accusation is 

a singular incident, on October 22, 2019. The prior warnings and notices that were also 

proven are pertinent to the degree of adverse action that may be taken by the 

Commission under Regulation section 80300, subdivision (b), discussed in more detail 

below, but are not separate grounds for taking adverse action. The singular incident 

does not support the conclusion respondent showed “persistent” defiance or refusal, 

as required to state a cause for discipline under Code section 44421. 

/// 

39 

25. 

There is no cause to take adverse action against respondent’s credentials 

under Code section 44421, for persistent defiance of, or refusal to obey, the laws 

regulating the duties of persons serving in the public school system. 

26. 

Before the Commission may take action against a credential, it is required 

to establish respondent’s conduct is related to his fitness to teach. (Morrison; see Legal 

Conclusion 7.) Evident unfitness for service is both a separate basis to impose 

discipline on a teaching credential under Code section 44421, and also must be 

established before immoral conduct, unprofessional conduct, or an act of moral 

turpitude can be found as a basis for discipline. In Morrison, the California Supreme 

Court examined a teacher’s non-criminal consensual homosexual relationship, with no 

connection to his position as a teacher, and concluded there was an insufficient nexus 

between the misconduct and his teaching credential. Therefore, the teacher’s 

credential could not be disciplined. Some of the factors used in this determination, 

known as the Morrison factors, are now included in Regulation section 80302 relating 

to investigations by the Committee. Only the pertinent factors need to be analyzed. 

(West Valley–Mission Community College Dist. v. Concepcion (1993) 16 Cal.App.4th 

1766, 1777.) 

27. 

The eight Morrison/Regulation section 80302 factors are applied here as 

follows: 

27A.  The likelihood that the conduct may have adversely affected students, 

fellow teachers, or the educational community, and the degree of such adversity 

anticipated. This likelihood was established by clear and convincing evidence. 

27B.  The proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct. The incident with 

respondent, Hancock, and S.A. occurred on October 22, 2019. 

40 

27C.  The type of credential held or applied for by the person involved. 

Respondent’s credentials allow him to teach students of elementary through grade 12 

in a single subject and to teach vocational education. 

27D.  The extenuating or aggravating circumstances surrounding the conduct. 

An extenuating circumstance would, by definition, lessen the seriousness of a situation, 

perhaps by offering a partial excuse. In one sense, respondent’s continued difficulties 

with interruptions to his class as well as prior issues with Hancock might be considered 

as extenuating in a subjective sense. However, as noted above, such interruptions were 

the norm and respondent’s overreaction to what was the standard procedure in the 

AEC on the day of the incident aggravated the circumstances. 

27E.  The praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the 

conduct. There is no perceived praiseworthiness in the acts established by the 

evidence. Respondent’s escalation of the situation by describing Hancock as having hit 

him with a document or pushing him, and as possibly having a gun or a knife, are 

escalations not supported by the facts and indicate a blameworthy motive. 

27F.  The likelihood of the recurrence of the questioned conduct. Recurrence is 

likely, given respondent has received warnings, reprimands, and conference summaries 

relating to his problematic conduct with colleagues, staff, and administrators from 

2011 through 2019, and had a therapist for most of that time with whom he discussed 

work issues and conflicts. Yet, the October 22, 2019 incident occurred and took on 

immense proportions and consequences. While it is hoped the conduct will not recur, 

respondent needs a longer track record of appropriate conduct and effective anger 

management and conflict resolution to give reasonable assurances the questioned 

conduct will not recur, and of continued success in his teaching career. 

41 

27G.  The extent to which disciplinary action may inflict an adverse impact or 

chilling effect upon the constitutional rights of the person involved, or other certified 

persons. Respondent did not offer any evidence to establish any constitutional right of 

his that will be impacted adversely by this matter. 

27H.  The publicity or notoriety given to the conduct. Most of the employees 

interviewed by Brenes were aware of the incident, student S.A. submitted an incident 

report, and the parents of S.A. were notified by the school counselor. 

28. 

There is sufficient evidence of a connection or nexus between 

respondent’s acts and words during the incident on October 22, 2019, and his fitness 

to teach. Complainant established by clear and convincing evidence respondent’s 

misconduct has a direct nexus to his fitness to teach and to the teaching profession. 

29. 

For evidence unfitness to teach to be a separate bases for adverse action, 

the unfitness must be by reason of temperamental defects or inadequacies; a character 

trait “not remediable merely on receipt of notice that one’s conduct fails to meet the 

expectations of the employing school district.” (Woodland, supra, 2 Cal.App.4th at p. 

1444.) Here, respondent received nine warnings, notices, and reprimands, including 

directives for improvements, in the eight years prior to the seminal incident. The 

number and subject matters of these prior warnings combined with the incident is 

clear and convincing evidence of a temperamental defect. 

30. 

There is cause to take adverse action against respondent’s credentials 

under Code section 44421 for evident unfitness for service, based on his actions and 

words on October 22, 2019. (See Factual Findings 11 through 19, 37, 44.) 

31. 

Respondent contends each separate sentence of the description of the 

October 22, 2019 incident, as described in paragraph 13 of the First Amended 

42 

Accusation, does not meet the criteria of any of the causes for discipline pleaded 

therein. However, as noted in Woodland and Hensey, it was not necessarily each 

individual act or comment but, rather, the totality. The events should be looked at in 

the aggregate. Adverse action against respondent’s credentials therefore is warranted. 

AGGRAVATING FACTORS 

32. 

In considering the degree of adverse action that may be appropriate, the 

Commission is authorized to consider aggravating factors. Regulation section 80300, 

subdivision (b), states: 

“Aggravating factor” is an event or circumstance which 

demonstrates that a greater degree of adverse action for an 

act of professional misconduct is needed to adequately 

protect the public, schoolchildren or the profession. 

Aggravating factors may include, but are not limited to, the 

following: 

(1) a prior record of adverse action including the nature and 

extent of that record; 

(2) that the misconduct evidences multiple acts of 

wrongdoing or demonstrates a pattern of misconduct; 

(3) that the misconduct was surrounded by or followed by 

bad faith, dishonesty or other violation of the laws 

governing educators; 

/// 

43 

(4) that the misconduct significantly harmed a child 

entrusted to the care of a credential holder or applicant, 

significantly harmed the public or the educational system; 

(5) that the holder or applicant demonstrated indifference 

toward the consequence of the misconduct, which includes 

failure to comply with known court orders; or 

(6) that the holder or applicant had prior notice, warnings 

or reprimands for similar conduct from any reliable source. 

33. 

Applying these factors, there have been no prior adverse actions against 

respondent’s credentials and his “misconduct,” i.e., the October 22, 2019 incident, is 

singular. There were no “multiple” acts. That act of misconduct was surrounded by 

dishonesty considering the false information respondent gave to the 911 operator and 

to a Sheriff’s deputy, and it significantly harmed a student and another teacher. 

Respondent demonstrated indifference toward the consequence of the misconduct 

when it occurred. There were nine instances from 2011 to earlier in 2019 when 

respondent had prior notice, warnings, or reprimands for inappropriate interactions 

with staff, colleagues, and administrators. 

Outcome 

34. 

Licensing disciplinary matters like this are not for the primary purpose of 

punishing an individual. (Camacho v. Youde (1979) 95 Cal.App.3d 161, 165.) Rather, a 

licensing agency should be primarily concerned with protection of the public. (Fahmy 

v. Medical Bd. of California (1995) 38 Cal.App.4th 810, 817.) 

/// 

44 

35. 

In most instances where wrongdoing has been proven, the person’s 

reactions and subsequent demonstration of having learned from the consequences 

should be considered. Rehabilitation denotes the restoring of privileges and a good 

name, as through therapy and education. (American Heritage Dict. (3d ed. 1994) p. 

695.) Legally, rehabilitation requires a consideration of those offenses from which one 

has allegedly been rehabilitated. (Pacheco v. State Bar (1987) 43 Cal.3d 1041.) 

Rehabilitation is a state of mind, and the law looks with favor upon rewarding with the 

opportunity to serve one who has achieved reformation and regeneration. (Id. at p. 

1058.) The absence of a prior disciplinary record is a mitigating factor. (Chefsky v. State 

Bar (1984) 36 Cal.3d 116, 132, fn. 10.) Remorse and cooperation are mitigating factors. 

(In re Demergian (1989) 48 Cal.3d 284, 296.) While a candid admission of misconduct 

and full acknowledgment of wrongdoing may be a necessary step in the rehabilitation 

process, it is only a first step. A truer indication of rehabilitation is presented if an 

individual demonstrates by sustained conduct over an extended period of time that he 

is once again fit to practice. (In re Trebilcock (1981) 30 Cal.3d 312.) 

36. 

To determine the appropriate outcome for respondent requires 

consideration of the aggravating factors and the evidence of his rehabilitation. The 

nature of the October 22, 2019 incident itself and the aggravating factors supports 

adverse action at the level of revocation of respondent’s credentials. It cannot be 

concluded respondent accepted full responsibility for his actions and expressed 

remorse. His submissions to the Committee of Credentials and to the Commission 

continued to lay blame on others, some of which may have been warranted, but he 

accepted virtually no blame himself. Those submissions, in December 2020 and 

January 2021 (see Exhibits 24, pp. A315-A317, and CC), in the guise of providing 

“context” for the various events investigated, did not show acceptance of responsibility 

or remorse. Respondent, despite receiving numerous warnings, letters, and conference 

45 

summaries related to his bad conduct and poor reactions to and communications with 

others, continued to maintain that conduct and, in the October 22, 2019 incident, 

increase the amplitude to an unacceptable degree. Such actions and words occurred 

despite respondent consulting with a therapist, originally to demonstrate his fitness 

before returning to work in mid-2013 and continuing to the present. Respondent 

clearly had issues and conflicts with many colleagues, staff, and administrators during 

his time at the District. 

37.  Of note, there was less evidence of issues between respondent and 

students, and some students were extremely generous in their praise of respondent. 

Similarly, respondent has had colleagues, staff, and administrators who praise and 

value him as a teacher, colleague, and friend. He has begun to undertake actions to 

support his rehabilitation. However, considering the extreme nature and effects of 

respondent’s misconduct, he does not yet have a sufficient record of positive action to 

allow him to maintain his credentials. For protection of the public, those credentials 

are revoked. 

ORDER 

1. 

The Clear Designated Subjects Supervision and Coordination Credential 

issued to respondent Jonathan Jay Wright is revoked. 

2. 

The Certificate of Eligibility Administrative Services Credential issued to 

respondent Jonathan Jay Wright is revoked. 

3. 

The Clear Single Subject Teaching Credential issued to respondent 

Jonathan Jay Wright is revoked. 

46 

4. 

The Clear Designated Subjects Vocational Education Teaching Credential: 

Full Time issued to respondent Jonathan Jay Wright is revoked. 

DATE: 

DAVID B. ROSENMAN 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearing

47 

04/19/2023 
 
 
 
