BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Accusation Against: 

JON CHRISTOPHER KLAUS, 

Respondent. 

Agency Case No. 2-2207373 

OAH No. 2022120279 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Howard W. Cohen, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings 

(OAH), State of California, heard this matter by videoconference on July 26 and 27, 

2023. 

Langston M. Edwards, Deputy Attorney General, appeared on behalf of 

complainant Mary Vixie Sandy, Ed.D., Executive Director of the California Commission 

on Teacher Credentialing (Commission). 

John D. Bishop, Attorney at Law, represented respondent Jon Christopher Klaus, 

who was present. 

Oral and documentary evidence was received. The record was held open to 

permit certain exhibits to be redacted by July 28, 2023. The record was closed and the 

matter was submitted for decision on July 28, 2023. 

SUMMARY 

In the Accusation, complainant seeks to revoke respondent’s teaching credential 

for unprofessional conduct, immoral conduct, acts of moral turpitude, and evident 

unfitness for service. Complainant based those causes for discipline on allegations that 

respondent, in his capacity as Treasurer of the local teachers’ union, engaged in 

improprieties concerning expense reimbursements. 

Respondent admits making some errors as Treasurer but denies any wrongful 

intent. He has resigned from the office of union Treasurer. He taught high school 

physics while he served as Treasurer and continues to teach physics at the same 

school. 

As set forth below, complainant has not clearly and convincingly established 

respondent’s certificate should be subject to adverse action. The Accusation is 

dismissed. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Parties and Jurisdiction 

1. 

On August 11, 1994, the Commission issued a Clear Single Subject 

Teaching Credential to respondent. The credential was in full force and effect at all 

relevant times; it was renewed on March 1, 2022, and is scheduled to expire on March 

1, 2027. On January 16, 2008, the Commission issued respondent a Clear Certificate of 

Completion of Staff Development, which was in full force and effect at all relevant 

times and which does not expire. 

2 

2. 

On May 23, 2022, complainant brought an Accusation against 

respondent while acting in her official capacity. Respondent filed a notice of defense. 

All jurisdictional requirements have been met. 

Respondent’s Acts as Union Treasurer 

3. 

Respondent has been teaching physics at Northview High School in 

Covina for about 30 years. He joined the Covina Unified Education Association (CUEA), 

the local teachers’ union, when he began teaching at Northview High School. For 10 

years, from about 2007 to August 2017, respondent served as Treasurer of the union, 

an elected position. Respondent resigned as Treasurer on August 11, 2017. 

4. 

Respondent received no training to serve as Treasurer. He was 

responsible for, among other things, processing claims for reimbursement by union 

members who incurred expenses on the union’s behalf. To process those claims, 

respondent developed the “greensheet,” a form to fill out and submit when making a 

claim for reimbursement. The completed greensheet had to be approved by 

respondent and by another executive officer of the union, and all reimbursement 

checks had to be signed by respondent and the President and Vice President of the 

CUEA. The reimbursed expenses were listed on a report respondent made to the 

executive board every quarter. 

5. 

Respondent himself incurred expenses and submitted reimbursement 

claims over the years of his tenure. He disclosed the basis for every claim on his 

greensheets to the executive board member whose signature he sought for approval 

and for countersigning the payment check. He itemized in detail each reimbursement 

claim on the back of each greensheet. He presented his reimbursement requests with 

any others in his quarterly Treasurer’s report to the executive board. He was as 

3 

transparent about his expenses as one should expect of an officer responsible for 

union funds. 

6. 

The union had no written policies regarding what expenses were to be 

reimbursed, or how mileage for travel on union business was to be recompensed. The 

union never instructed respondent on its expectations regarding travel or mileage 

reimbursement. 

7. 

The executive board members who reviewed respondent’s claims, 

countersigned his checks, and reviewed the quarterly reports at executive board 

meetings, exercised minimal oversight over respondent’s claims. 

8. 

A witness for complainant, Sita Rampershad, was on the CUEA’s executive 

board from 2012 and presided over the board when she served as CUEA President for 

two school years, 2016-2017 and 2017-2018. Ms. Rampershad complained that 

respondent’s reimbursement claims were fraudulent. She received a notice from the 

California Teachers’ Association (CTA) around March 2017 that the CUEA had an 

unpaid printing bill for over $3,000. Ms. Rampershad began investigating the union’s 

finances. 

9. 

Ms. Rampershad examined the greensheets respondent submitted for 

travel reimbursement and learned he claimed reimbursement for travel from his home 

to the union office. Ms. Rampershad did not believe that was appropriate, testifying 

that it is just “not done.” She acknowledged, however, that the practice violated no 

CUEA policy and that she never discussed it with respondent when he submitted 

reimbursement claims. Ms. Rampershad also alleged some of the mileage respondent 

claimed was excessive; she acknowledged, however, that she did not know whether the 

4 

mileage included respondent having to go home from the school site to pick up 

materials before traveling to a meeting site. 

10.  Ms. Rampershad also alleged respondent claimed reimbursement for 

travel he did not engage in, based on records showing there was no substitute teacher 

requested to take his place in class while he was working on union business. She 

acknowledged that she did not know whether no substitute was listed because 

respondent was called to union business during the day, after he reported to the 

school site. 

11.  Ms. Rampershad testified respondent was reimbursed twice for the same 

expense of $55.40, incurred at the Butter Bakery, and was reimbursed $17.98 for a 

breakfast meeting that never occurred. 

12.  Ms. Rampershad discovered respondent had received a negotiator’s 

stipend, in the summer of 2015, 2016, and 2017, to which she believes he was not 

entitled. She also testified she found duplicate payments for some of respondent’s 

expenses and overpayment for consulting during part of the final month of 

respondent's tenure as Treasurer. 

13.  Ms. Rampershad acknowledged that the co-signor of respondent’s 

checks, i.e., the President or Vice President, were responsible for ensuring the amounts 

to be reimbursed were appropriate. She acknowledged that respondent listed his 

travel expenses in the Treasurer’s Report he presented quarterly to the executive 

board and that he was transparent about how he was spending union funds. “It’s 

absolutely true we missed” what she believes were overcharges respondent disclosed 

to the board. According to Ms. Rampershad, Adam Hampton, currently the CUEA 

President, who when a member of the executive board co-signed many of 

5 

respondent’s reimbursement checks, apologized to the board for failing to use greater 

diligence in reviewing respondent’s submissions. Mr. Hampton confirmed he had 

apologized for his lack of oversight. 

14.  Ms. Rampershad reported her findings to respondent. Respondent told 

her he did not believe he had submitted any incorrect claims. Ms. Rampershad then 

reported her findings to the executive board. She invited respondent to address the 

board. Respondent declined. Instead, respondent resigned from his position as 

Treasurer. He remained a member of the faculty at Northview High School, where he 

continues to teach physics. 

15.  Ms. Rampershad filed an insurance claim to recover amounts she 

believed the union overpaid respondent. The union received the full amount from the 

carrier, $6,309. The executive board authorized Ms. Rampershad to file a police report 

claiming respondent had embezzled union funds. With the CTA’s guidance, the 

executive board notified union representatives of the police report; the report was not 

made public to the entire school community. 

16. 

In the absence of any policy, training, or instruction as to union practices, 

and in view of respondent’s complete transparency with the executive board members 

about the basis for his reimbursement claims, complainant did not establish any 

ethical culpability on respondent’s part. 

17. 

Respondent made errors that resulted in overcompensation to him. For 

example, he received submitted and received payment for duplicate reimbursement 

claims for the same expense. But the board members could have identified those 

mistakes at the time respondent submitted them had they properly performed their 

oversight functions. Complainant argues that respondent, while on union business, 

6 

should not have included in a mileage reimbursement claim the miles he traveled from 

his home to the school or the District office. That may seem sensible to complainant’s 

witnesses, but again, no policy so stated and no instruction was provided to 

respondent. And respondent disclosed, on the back of all his greensheets, exactly how 

many miles he was seeking reimbursement for. The evidence did not establish 

respondent intended to deceive or schemed to defraud the union. 

18.  Mr. Hampton acknowledged CUEA had no policy or standard practice 

governing mileage expenses. He does not remember ever discussing travel 

reimbursement with respondent and acknowledged respondent could not have known 

of any CUEA policy on mileage reimbursement. Respondent would always write the 

miles he traveled on the greensheet for Mr. Hampton to review, and would include 

those figures in his Treasurer’s report to the executive board. Mr. Hampton, who 

signed many of the reimbursement checks for respondent, does not believe 

respondent ever tried to conceal the basis for any of his travel reimbursement claims. 

Ms. Rampershad, too, acknowledged that she voted to approve reimbursement checks 

for respondent while she served as a member at large of the executive board. 

19. 

Respondent testified he obtained Mr. Hampton’s authorization to take a 

stipend for union negotiation work he performed during the summer. Mr. Hampton 

does not remember authorizing three years of negotiation team stipends for 

respondent. He is not certain about it, but does not believe he authorized the stipends, 

which must be part of the budget approved by the executive board. He does not know 

whether he told respondent it was alright for him to receive the stipends. 

/// 

/// 

7 

Criminal Conviction 

20.  On February 16, 2021, in People v. Klaus (Super. Ct. L.A. County, 2018, 

No. KA119627), respondent pled nolo contendere to, and was convicted of, violating 

Penal Code section 484, subdivision (a) (theft), a misdemeanor. The court found a 

factual basis for and accepted respondent’s plea. The court suspended imposition of 

sentence and placed respondent on one year’s summary probation on terms including 

that respondent serve one day in county jail, with credit for one day served; pay 

assessments, costs, and fines totaling $261; and pay restitution to the victim. (Ex. 5.) 

21. 

The record does not explicitly reflect respondent’s compliance with all 

terms of probation. But on March 21, 2022, the court granted respondent’s petition for 

dismissal under Penal Code section 1203.4, ordered the plea of nolo contendere be set 

aside and vacated and a plea of not guilty be entered, and dismissed the case. (Ex. A.) 

22. 

The facts and circumstances underlying the theft conviction are not 

explicitly stated in the record. A sheriff’s department detective wrote in a booking 

report dated May 2, 2018, that respondent, in reply to an allegation he was 

responsible for the theft of $6,265.52 through the use of unauthorized transactions, 

“confirmed discrepancies, but not an actual amount.” (Ex. 5, p. A207.) The booking and 

arrest records do not reflect any admission of intent by respondent. Nor do the court 

records. Four felony charges were initially brought against respondent; two were 

dismissed on July 10, 2019, on a finding of insufficient cause, and the remaining two 

were dismissed on February 16, 2021, as part of a plea deal. (Ex. 5, pp. A 219, A239.) 

The misdemeanor theft charge, to which respondent pled nolo contendere in 

accordance with the plea deal, was added by amendment to the Information on 

February 16, 2021. (Ex. 5, p. A237.) The court minutes do not reflect the facts 

underlying the court’s finding of a basis for respondent’s plea. 

8 

Action Taken by School District 

23.  Michele Doll, Ed.D., Assistant Superintendent of Personnel Services, 

Covina Valley Unified School District, sent respondent a Notice of Unprofessional 

Conduct, dated February 26, 2021, as a result of respondent's criminal conviction. The 

notice included directives for respondent’s improvement, directing respondent to 

maintain high ethical standards, refrain from stealing or misappropriating District 

funds, and refrain from serving as a faculty advisor for student organizations or 

leading extra-curricular activities, among other things. The notice provided that Dr. 

Doll would reassess respondent for sufficient improvement after 45 days. 

24. 

Respondent complied with the directives and, after 45 days of 

monitoring, the school district identified no deficiencies. He has never since been 

alleged to have misappropriated any funds or property. 

Mitigation and Rehabilitation 

25. 

Respondent acknowledged having fallen short of his duty as union 

Treasurer and received money he was not entitled to due to his own errors. He feels 

that as Treasurer he occupied a position of trust with the union and his errors painted 

the school district in a negative light. 

26. 

Respondent testified he regrets being defensive with Ms. Rampershad 

when she asked him to address the financial issues she identified. (See Factual Finding 

14, ante.) He was frustrated with the allegations and felt unappreciated. He wishes 

that, instead of simply resigning as union Treasurer, he had met with Ms. Rampershad 

and the executive board and tried to resolve the issues. He acknowledges his failure to 

do so made the problem worse. He regrets that he focused on the allegations that 

were not true instead of on the items he was at fault for. Respondent knows he was 

9 

not a victim and believes requiring him to pay for his mistakes was appropriate 

because he failed in his responsibilities as Treasurer. 

27. 

Respondent was not experiencing financial difficulties between 2014 and 

2017. In addition to his teaching salary of about $116,000, he was earning $750 per 

month as union Treasurer, $450 to $500 per month as a union contract consultant, and 

$275 per month as part of the union negotiation team. 

28. 

Respondent acknowledged receiving money from the union’s treasury he 

was not entitled to, though he denies intending to improperly benefit himself. No 

policy or officer of the executive board told respondent he should not claim 

reimbursement for travel from his home to meeting places, including the district’s 

office, all of which claims he disclosed to the officers in detail. Respondent on occasion 

left the school site and went home to pick up files before traveling to a meeting on 

union business, and he asked for reimbursement for the miles from home to the 

meeting. He acknowledges now that it would have been better to keep the files in the 

union office. Respondent testified he was entitled to stipends he received based on 

direction from Mr. Hampton; respondent regrets not having that direction or 

authorization for that item from the executive board documented. Respondent admits 

he erroneously sought a duplicate reimbursement and reimbursement for a Saturday 

breakfast. 

29. 

Respondent wants to continue to teach. He understands the 

Commission’s concerns about his professionalism and honesty, but he assures the 

Commission he will not engage in similar conduct in the future in his role as a teacher. 

He has had a successful 30-year teaching career, feels he is an integral part of the 

campus community and of the school district, and has had continuing success once he 

returned to the classroom in the spring of 2021. He has received only positive 

10 

performance evaluations and has continued to work closely with his colleagues. He 

does not intend to hold any office with the union again or to serve the school district 

in any financial capacity. 

30. 

Respondent was arrested in the principal’s office on campus on May 2, 

2018, after the executive board reported him to the Los Angeles County Sheriff. No 

other staff members were present. Respondent does not know whether the district 

made students or parents aware of the arrest. Respondent was released by law 

enforcement officials. The school district placed him on a brief leave and then returned 

him to the classroom. Respondent was again arrested in December 2018 based on the 

same allegations and was criminally charged. From December 2018 to February 2021, 

the district had respondent report to the central office instead of to the classroom; 

during that time, respondent worked to develop the curriculum for Advanced 

Placement physics and conceptual physics. 

31. 

Respondent offered the testimony of a character witness, Ryan Rienstra, a 

math teacher at Northview High School who has known respondent for about 30 

years. Though he has not observed respondent teaching in the classroom, he shares 

many students with respondent and hears respondent interact with staff. Mr. Rienstra 

testified respondent has a very positive reputation among the students for helping 

them succeed in physics. Respondent is well-respected by and has an excellent 

reputation among his colleagues and among all staff. Respondent told Mr. Rienstra of 

the criminal conviction and of this proceeding, as well as the union’s having alleged he 

embezzled about $6,000. Nevertheless, Mr. Rienstra holds respondent in high regard 

and finds him to be truthful and trustworthy. Mr. Rienstra testified respondent’s arrest 

was not a subject of conversation at teacher meetings. 

/// 

11 

32. 

Respondent also offered in evidence numerous character reference 

letters. 

33.  Manuel Burciaga, respondent’s principal for four years, was present when 

respondent was arrested. Mr. Burciaga wrote respondent told him about the criminal 

conviction and is “sincerely remorseful.” (Ex. E.) Respondent had no disciplinary action 

against him and received all positive evaluations while Mr. Burciaga was principal. 

“Students enjoy his classes and his innovative and engaging physics lessons. He had 

great attendance and his colleagues liked working with him. I never had any issues 

with him regarding money or anything else.” (Ibid.) 

34. 

Leo Magallon, the principal at Northview High School, has served as 

respondent’s supervisor and evaluator for the last two years as an assistant principal. 

Mr. Magallon has observed respondent in the classroom, where respondent interacts 

with students “in a positive and constructive manner.” (Ex. F.) He has been “a team 

player,” agreeing on short notice to take on extra teaching responsibilities. “Every time 

that I’ve needed him to take on an additional task, [respondent] has been there to 

serve our students. Respondent recently participated in a physics teacher summer 

institute and researched new physics teaching tools to implement in his classroom. He 

“has a deep connection with all of our staff,” and has encouraged and supported Mr. 

Magallon throughout his two years at Northview High School. (Ibid.) 

35.  Major Anderson II taught physics at a different high school in the same 

district until he recently retired; he has known respondent for more than 25 years. The 

two of them have worked on many improvements to the district’s science curriculum; 

without respondent’s “insight, determination and reputation,” many improvements 

would not have occurred. (Ex. G.) As a union representative, respondent demonstrated 

good judgment and empathy. Respondent discussed his criminal conviction and this 

12 

proceeding with Mr. Anderson, who wrote, “it is my belief that [respondent] would not 

be a risk to our profession or to our students, in fact I fully believe that he will be a 

positive asset to both groups. I hope my testimony of [respondent's] mental, social 

and moral qualities will allow you to permit [him] to continue to be a highly 

contributing member of our profession when determining the outcome of his case. 

(Ibid.) 

36. 

Teresa Humphreys, a counselor at Northview High School, has known 

respondent for 30 years. She wrote he is “a hard-working teacher who truly cares 

about his students and our school community. [¶] He told me about his conviction and 

I know he is very regretful about the whole situation. I understand that his credential is 

in jeopardy of being revoked. Regardless of what happened regarding his conviction, I 

completely trust Jon in his profession, to teach the students at our school, and even to 

teach my own children. I would also trust him with my finances and my personal 

information.” (Ex. I.) 

37. 

Robert Ewing, a family friend, a Lieutenant with the Claremont Police 

Department, and a former financial crimes detective, has known respondent for 15 

years and believes respondent to be “an upstanding, thoughtful, and intelligent 

individual who gives the utmost of himself, whether it is to his family and friends or to 

his career. (Ex. H.) Mr. Ewing, who knows of respondent’s criminal conviction, believes 

respondent “would never take advantage of his position for personal gain.” (Ibid.) 

38. 

Pamela Smith, a math and computer teacher at Northview High School 

for 24 years, knew respondent was kept out of the classroom for almost two years but 

“was returned to the classroom where he has continued to serve his students to the 

highest level. . . . Through everything that he has been through his passion for what he 

teaches and who he teaches has remained at the same high level. Even this year when 

13 

he was asked to teach an AP and a regular class during the same period, while also 

teaching 6 classes. [Respondent] is a benefit to his students and to our school.” (Ex. K.) 

39. 

Janice Klaus, respondent’s wife of 22 years, wrote of respondent’s caring 

and generous character. “He takes great pride in teaching his students Physics, but 

also in teaching them about having goals and reaching for them. He shares with them 

that no matter where you begin, if you have a dream there is a path to achieve it. I 

cannot even begin to tell you how many students and former students over the past 

20 years that I have witnessed telling [him] about how he helped them succeed not 

just in the classroom, but in life. We literally run into people all the time who thank 

him.” (Ex. J.) She asked for consideration of “how much good he has brought to his 

family, his friends, colleagues, thousands of students, and to countless numbers of 

people in the community.” (Ibid.) 

Discussion 

40. 

Complainant’s evidence in support of its allegations underlying the 

charges of unprofessional conduct, immoral conduct, acts of moral turpitude, and 

evident unfitness for service, that respondent acted deliberately to steal from the union, 

was not convincing. 

41. 

It is true that respondent pled nolo contendere to and was criminally 

convicted of a misdemeanor. But for every travel transaction for which respondent 

sought reimbursement, he documented the mileage and locations, gave receipts to the 

union President, who co-signed respondent’s checks, and then disclosed the expenses 

on quarterly Treasurer reports he presented to the executive board. After respondent’s 

disclosures, the officers and then the board approved the reimbursement requests, and 

various officers signed his checks. Neither Ms. Rampershad nor Mr. Hampton ever told 

14 

respondent he could not seek reimbursement for the mileage he claimed, nor did any 

union policy prohibit it. It is unlikely, based on this record, that respondent intentionally 

committed theft when he presented checks to Mr. Hampton or other officers for 

signature, all while disclosing what the checks were for. The record also fails to clearly 

establish the other alleged misdeeds, such as whether the stipends paid to respondent 

were authorized, due to conflicting testimony, none of which is authoritative. 

Respondent has admitted to two errors, double-billing for one expense and 

erroneously billing for a non-union-related breakfast. 

42. 

The court documents do not identify the conduct for which respondent 

was convicted, other than that he pled nolo contendere to petty theft. Respondent’s 

criminal conviction for theft by itself does not clearly support any of the individual 

allegations complainant made in the Accusation. Complainant did not provide a 

factual basis for the court’s acceptance of respondent’s plea, or for the basis for the 

two felony charges that remained after two others were dismissed, and which were 

themselves dismissed as part of respondent’s plea deal. The court record of the 

conviction fails to identify the dollar amount of the theft or of the amount of 

restitution respondent was to pay. (Ex. 5, p. A239.) 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

Applicable Authority 

1. 

Under the Education Code, commencing with section 44000, and 

California Code of Regulations, title 5, commencing with section 80001, the 

Commission is responsible for credentialing teachers in public schools in California, 

including issuing credentials and taking “adverse action” against applicants and 

15 

credential holders. “Adverse action” includes the suspension or revocation of a 

credential or the private admonition or public reproval of a credential holder. (Ed. 

Code, § 44000.5; Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80300, subd. (a).) 

2. 

The Commission “shall” take adverse action against an individual’s 

teaching credentials “for immoral or unprofessional conduct, or for persistent defiance 

of, and refusal to obey, the laws regulating the duties of persons serving in the public 

school system, or for any cause that would have warranted the denial of an application 

for a credential or the renewal thereof, or for evident unfitness for service.” (Ed. Code, 

§ 44421.) One cause that may warrant the denial of an application is if the applicant 

“[h]as committed any act involving moral turpitude.” (Ed. Code, § 44345, subd. (e).) 

3. 

“The term ‘immoral’ has been defined generally as that which is hostile to 

the welfare of the general public and contrary to good morals. Immorality . . . includes 

conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, 

dissoluteness; or as wilful, flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral indifference 

to the opinions of respectable members of the community, and as an inconsiderate 

attitude toward good order and the public welfare. [Citation.]” (Orloff v. Los Angeles 

Turf Club (1951) 36 Cal.2d 734, 740; see also Board of Education of San Francisco 

Unified School Dist. v. Weiland (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811 (Weiland).) 

4. 

“Unprofessional conduct” has been described as “‘that which violates the 

rules or ethical code of a profession or such conduct which is unbecoming a member 

of a profession in good standing.’” (Board of Education of the City of Los Angeles v. 

Swan (1953) 41 Cal.2d 546, 553, quoting 66 Corpus Juris 55, overruled in part on 

another ground in Bekiaris v. Board of Education (1972) 6 Cal.3d 575, 587, fn. 7.) For 

example, conduct that produced serious friction in the school and showed a teacher’s 

insubordination and refusal to conform to the instructions and requirements of 

16 

superiors has been held to be unprofessional conduct. (Johnston v. Taft School Dist. 

(1937) 19 Cal.App.2d 405.) 

5. 

“Moral turpitude is a concept that ‘defies exact description’ [citation] and 

‘cannot be defined with precision’ [citation].” (In re Grant (2014) 58 Cal.4th 469, 475-

476.) “Our Supreme Court has defined moral turpitude as ‘an act of baseness, vileness 

or depravity in the private and social duties which a man owes to his fellowmen, or to 

society in general, contrary to the accepted and customary rule of right and duty 

between man and man.’ [Citation.] Moral turpitude has also been described as any 

crime or misconduct committed without excuse, or any ‘dishonest or immoral’ act not 

necessarily a crime. [Citation.] The definition depends on the state of public morals 

and may vary according to the community or the times, as well as on the degree of 

public harm produced by the act in question. [Citation.]” (Clerici v. Department of 

Motor Vehicles (1990) 224 Cal.App.3d 1016, 1027; see also Ricasa v. Office of 

Administrative Hearings (2018) 31 Cal.App.5th 262, 281; Golde v. Fox (1979) 98 

Cal.App.3d 167, 185.) Moral turpitude has also been described as the “‘general 

readiness to do evil.’ [Citation.]” (Donley v. Davi (2009) 180 Cal.App.4th 447, 458.) 

6. 

For purposes of disciplining a credential holder, conduct cannot be 

characterized as immoral, unprofessional, or involving moral turpitude unless it 

indicates a teacher is unfit to teach. (Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 

Cal.3d 214, 229 (Morrison).) The Morrison court identified factors to consider in 

making this determination. Those factors have been codified in a regulation, which 

provides that the Commission may consider such matters as: “(1) The likelihood that 

the conduct may have adversely affected students, fellow teachers, or the educational 

community, and the degree of such adversity anticipated; [¶] (2) The proximity or 

remoteness in time of the conduct; [¶] (3) The type of credential held or applied for by 

17 

the person involved; [¶] (4) The extenuating or aggravating circumstances surrounding 

the conduct; [¶] (5) The praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives resulting 

in the conduct; [¶] (6) The likelihood of the recurrence of the questioned conduct; [¶] 

(7) The extent to which disciplinary action may inflict an adverse impact or chilling 

effect upon the constitutional rights of the person involved, or other certified persons; 

[¶] (8) The publicity or notoriety given to the conduct.” (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80302, 

subd. (a); Morrison, supra, 1 Cal.3d at p. 229.) Not all Morrison factors need be 

examined, only the pertinent ones. (West Valley – Mission Community College Dist. v. 

Concepcion (1993) 16 Cal.App.4th 1766, 1777.) 

7. 

The Accusation also alleges evident unfitness for service. Evident 

unfitness for service properly means “clearly not fit, not adapted to or unsuitable for 

teaching, ordinarily by reason of temperamental defects or inadequacies. [Fn. 

omitted.]” (Woodland Joint Unified School Dist. v. Commission on Professional 

Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444 (Woodland).) This cause for discipline 

connotes a “fixed character trait, presumably not remediable merely on receipt of 

notice that one’s conduct fails to meet the expectations of the employing school 

district.” (Ibid.) On this cause for discipline, the criteria for unfitness in Morrison “must 

be analyzed to determine, as a threshold matter, whether the cited conduct indicates 

unfitness for service. [Citation.] If the Morrison criteria indicate unfitness to teach, the 

next step is to determine whether the ‘unfitness’ is ‘evident’; i.e., whether the offensive 

conduct is caused by a defect in temperament. (Woodland, supra, 2 Cal.App.4th at p. 

1445.) For instance, a teacher’s removal of school property (a public address system 

speaker) from the classroom wall may be considered evidence of evident unfitness for 

service. (Palo Verde Unified School Dist. of Riverside County v. Hensey (1970) 9 

Cal.App.3d 967, 973.) 

18 

8. 

The Commission may also consider aggravating factors, such as whether 

the misconduct demonstrates a pattern of misconduct, was surrounded by bad faith or 

dishonesty, or significantly harmed the public or the educational system. (Cal. Code 

Regs., tit. 5, § 80300, subd. (b).) 

9. 

Because this case involves a professional license, the burden of proof is 

on complainant to establish cause for adverse action by clear and convincing evidence 

to a reasonable certainty. (Ettinger v. Board of Medical Quality Assurance (1982) 135 

Cal.App.3d 853, 855-856.) This means the burden rests with complainant to offer proof 

that is clear, explicit, and unequivocal, “so clear as to leave no substantial doubt” and 

“sufficiently strong to command the unhesitating assent of every reasonable mind.” (In 

re Marriage of Weaver (1990) 224 Cal.App.3d 478, 487; citations omitted.) 

Cause for Discipline 

10. 

Cause does not exist to take adverse action against respondent’s 

credential under Education Code section 44421 for unprofessional conduct, as set 

forth in Factual Findings 3 through 42. 

11. 

Cause does not exist to take adverse action against respondent’s 

credential under Education Code section 44421 for immoral conduct, as set forth in 

Factual Findings 3 through 42. 

12. 

Cause does not exist to take adverse action against respondent’s 

credential under Education Code section 44421 and 44345, subdivision (e), for 

committing acts of moral turpitude, as set forth in Factual Findings 3 through 42. 

/// 

/// 

19 

13. 

Cause does not exist to take adverse action against respondent’s 

credential under Education Code section 44421 for committing an act or acts 

constituting evident unfitness for service, as set forth in Factual Findings 3 through 42. 

14. 

All admissible evidence and applicable statutes and regulations, including 

the Morrison factors, have been considered. Complainant failed to establish by clear 

and convincing evidence that respondent engaged in unprofessional or immoral 

conduct, committed acts of moral turpitude, or is evidently unfit for service. (See 

Factual Findings 3-42.) 

15. 

Respondent’s errors led to a criminal conviction, which for a while 

adversely affected the educational community, or at least union members and staff 

who knew about it. But there is no evidence on the record that students knew of the 

conviction. Nor has complainant established that respondent’s continued presence on 

campus has adversely affected teachers and union members. Respondent is still on the 

faculty and has continued to teach since he returned to the classroom in after February 

2021. The school district seems satisfied with respondent’s continued presence on 

campus; the district only gave respondent a written warning and a 45-day directive 

when he returned to the classroom, and respondent complied. 

16. 

There is no risk of a chilling effect upon the constitutional rights of the 

person involved, and the conduct received some publicity and notoriety. 

17. 

There were, however, mitigating circumstances surrounding the conduct, 

including the lack of any policy or guidance about claims for travel reimbursement. 

18. 

The record fails to establish respondent acted out of any blameworthy 

motive; to the contrary, any such motive is belied by respondent’s open disclosures of 

his expenses to the executive board and the union’s officers. Respondent accepted 

20 

responsibility for his conduct; the evidence established that he made errors, but it did 

not establish that he was morally culpable. 

19. 

The conduct, which occurred from 2014 to 2017, was fairly remote in 

time; and there is virtually no likelihood the questioned conduct could recur. (See, e.g., 

In re Conflenti (1981) 29 Cal.3d 120, 124-125.) Respondent is no longer Treasurer of 

the union and is not in a position of financial responsibility in his capacity as a physics 

teacher. 

20. 

Ultimately, there is no evidence on this record that respondent should 

not be permitted to continue his status as a credentialed teacher. He has an excellent 

reputation as a teacher and serves the student community well, and his continued 

credentialing is in the best interests of the public. 

ORDER 

The Accusation against Jon Christopher Klaus, Clear Single Subject Teaching 

Credential, Clear Certificate of Completion of Staff Development, is dismissed. 

DATE: 

HOWARD W. COHEN 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings 

21 

Howard W. Cohen (Sep 7, 2023 11:26 PDT)09/07/2023 
 
 
 
