BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Accusation Against: 

JAMIL WELLS, Respondent 

Agency Case No. 2-268971276 

OAH No. 2022050806 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Administrative Law Judge Coren D. Wong, Office of Administrative Hearings, 

State of California, heard this matter by videoconference on August 25, 2022, from 

Sacramento, California. 

Summer D. Haro, Deputy Attorney General, represented complainant Mary Vixie 

Sandy, Ed.D., Executive Director of the California Commission on Teacher Credentialing 

(Commission).

Respondent Jamil Wells represented herself.

Evidence was received, the record closed, and the matter submitted for decision 

on August 25, 2022. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Jurisdictional Matters 

1.

The Commission issued respondent a Certificate of Clearance on June 3, 

2008, which expired July 1, 2013. The Commission issued her a Short-Term Staff Permit 

on August 4, 2008, which expired July 1, 2009. The Commission issued her an Intern 

Single Subject Teaching Credential on August 23, 2010, which expired September 1, 

2012. The Commission issued her a Preliminary Single Subject Teaching Credential on 

July 1, 2011, which expired August 1, 2016. The Commission issued her a Clear Single 

Subject Teaching Credential on July 17, 2015, which expired August 1, 2020, was 

reissued August 24, 2020, and expires September 1, 2025, unless renewed. 

Background 

2. 

Transformational Education Inc. (TEAM) – Charter School operates three 

charter schools in Stockton, California: two elementary schools, TEAM Charter Main 

and TEAM Charter Bianchi, and one middle school, TEAM Charter Academy. TEAM –

Charter School hired respondent as the vice principal of TEAM Charter Main for the 

2019/2020 school year. She was promoted to director of education (principal) of TEAM 

Charter Bianchi the following school year. 

3.

At all times relevant, Patricia Granados was TEAM – Charter School’s

director of human resources and Guadalupe Perez was its human resources 

coordinator. Esther Tellez was a front office clerk at TEAM Charter Bianchi. Mses. 

Granados, Perez, and Tellez prepared written statements documenting their 

interactions with respondent discussed below, which were admitted into evidence. 

2

They also testified at hearing. Respondent testified but did not introduce any 

documentary evidence. 

The Events of June 17 and 21, 2021 

MS. GRANADOS’S STATEMENT AND TESTIMONY

4. 

TEAM Charter Bianchi’s last day of school for the 2020/2021 school year 

was June 17, 2021. Ms. Granados called respondent that morning and requested an in-

person meeting for that afternoon. Respondent agreed to meet and asked the 

purpose of the meeting. Ms. Granados replied, “[it is] in regards to next school year.” 

Respondent continued to request further information, but Ms. Granados kept 

repeating her previous answer. Ms. Granados eventually stated she could not provide 

additional details by phone, but she could at the meeting. Respondent’s “voice grew 

agitated, and she asked if she could contact Executive Director, Deborah Vallejo.” 

Ms. Granados said she could, and respondent “quickly hung up.”

5. 

Mses. Granados and Perez arrived at TEAM Charter Bianchi shortly before 

their scheduled appointment with respondent. They met with respondent in one of the 

portable classrooms. The three of them sat down at a table, and Ms. Granados 

proceeded to explain that TEAM – Charter School was not renewing respondent’s 

employment contract for the following school year. As Ms. Granados attempted to 

explain the rationale for respondent’s non-reelection, respondent interrupted by 

stating “save it, I do not need to hear it and I do not want to be anywhere where I am 

not wanted.” Ms. Granados went over respondent’s final paycheck, her rights to 

continued health care coverage, and her rights regarding unemployment insurance 

benefits. She also explained respondent’s access to the school’s computer network was

being terminated immediately, and respondent should contact TEAM – Charter 

3

School’s Information and Technology Department (IT) if there were things she needed 

from the network. Ms. Perez collected respondent’s keys and school identification. 

Respondent acknowledged Ms. Granados’s information and left the portable while 

Mses. Granados and Perez remained to collect keys and identification from other staff. 

6. 

Sometime after the meeting had ended and respondent had left, 

Ms. Tellez came into the portable where Mses. Granados and Perez were working and 

told them it was time for her to go home but she could stay if necessary. She also told 

them respondent was still in the front office, had not packed any of her personal 

belongings, and was calling different people on the phone. Mses. Granados and Perez 

gathered their belongings and followed Ms. Tellez to the front office. Once there, 

Ms. Perez “clocked out” and walked to the parking lot to leave for the day. 

7. 

As Ms. Granados entered the front office, respondent asked to have until 

the following day to pack her personal belongings. Ms. Granados responded by 

agreeing to stay as long as respondent needed, but respondent insisted she needed 

an additional day. They continued their discussion after the remaining staff had left the 

front office and they were alone. Ms. Granados explained that she was willing to stay 

as long as respondent needed, but respondent needed to gather all her property that 

day. Respondent asserted she had two years’ worth of property to pack and she lost 

access to “personal property” stored in her school email account when the school 

terminated her access to the network. Ms. Granados suggested that respondent 

needed to contact IT to discuss retrieving her property, to which respondent replied, 

“this is making me upset because those are my personal documents that I have a right 

to.” As respondent spoke, she “grew very, very upset,” her demeanor was “aggressive,” 

and she was pacing back-and-forth. 

4

8. 

Ms. Granados obtained a business card from Ms. Tellez’s desk, wrote IT’s 

email address on the back, and handed it to respondent. As she handed the card to 

respondent, she pointed to the email address on the back and tried to explain that 

respondent should contact IT. Respondent took offense at Ms. Granados’s pointing to 

the business card “and became very aggressive.” She yelled, “Where I am from[,] girls 

like you get their ass beat for doing shit like that, you are so disrespectful, and you are 

lucky I do not beat your ass.” Respondent continued to yell at Ms. Granados, call her 

names, “and use extremely foul language.” 

9. 

Ms. Granados was three months pregnant at the time and began to fear 

for her physical safety and that of her unborn child. She walked to a different part of 

the room away from respondent and sat down to try to de-escalate the situation. It did 

not work. Ms. Granados said she had a “habit of talking with [her] hands,” admitted 

she should not have done that, explained it was not her intent to be disrespectful, and 

apologized. Respondent replied, “I do not give a shit, fuck you and leave.” 

10.  Ms. Perez had previously sent Ms. Granados a text message asking if she 

was okay or needed Ms. Perez to return to the front office. Ms. Granados responded 

by asking Ms. Perez to return to the front office because she feared respondent would 

physically harm her. As Ms. Perez was entering the front office, respondent continued 

yelling at Ms. Granados and stating that Ms. Granados had disrespected her with her 

hand gesture. Ms. Granados apologized again, but respondent said, “I do not give a 

shit[,] you already did it and you already disrespected me and now I am mad.” 

Respondent also stated, “You are lucky I do not beat your ass right now.” As she did 

so, she stepped towards Ms. Granados with clenched fists. Ms. Granados left the front 

office and did not return until after respondent had left. 

5

MS. PEREZ’S STATEMENT AND TESTIMONY 

11. Ms. Perez’s statement and testimony was consistent with Ms. Granados’s

statement and testimony. Ms. Perez described respondent as “very standing [

] 

offish” and not allowing Ms. Granados to talk when Ms. Granados tried to explain the 

reasons respondent was non-reelected.

12.  Ms. Perez confirmed that she had sent Ms. Granados a text message from 

the parking lot shortly after clocking out and said she waited in the parking lot for a 

response. Shortly thereafter, Ms. Granados responded by asking Ms. Perez to return to 

the front office because she feared for her safety. 

13. 

As Ms. Perez was walking towards the front office, she could hear yelling 

and screaming coming from the office from approximately 20 feet away. She initially 

could not tell whose voice it was, but she determined it was respondent’s as she

entered. Respondent was yelling aggressively, cussing, and threatening Ms. Granados. 

It was a “very hostile environment.” Respondent “was being more aggressive,” while 

Ms. Granados “was calm,” “looked upset,” and appeared to be “basically in shock.” 

14.  Once respondent noticed Ms. Perez, she explained that Ms. Granados 

had used hand gestures in a disrespectful manner and “bitches get their ass kicked for 

that shit” where she comes from. Respondent then told Ms. Granados she was from 

West Oakland and repeated “bitches get their ass kicked for that shit where I come 

from.”

15. Ms. Granados tried explaining what was going on to Ms. Perez, but 

respondent interrupted by telling Ms. Granados to “shut the fuck up,” “I do not want 

to hear shit you have to say,” and “get the fuck out” so she could talk to Ms. Perez.

Ms. Perez knew Ms. Granados was pregnant, feared for Ms. Granados’s safety and that 

6

of her unborn child, and sensed respondent’s aggression was building. Ms. Perez 

assured Ms. Granados she could handle the situation and suggested that 

Ms. Granados leave. Ms. Granados left the front office. 

16. 

After Ms. Granados had left, respondent continued venting to Ms. Perez. 

Respondent said Ms. Granados was lucky that respondent did not beat her up. When 

Ms. Perez asked if respondent knew Ms. Granados was pregnant, respondent said she 

“will beat [Ms. Granados’s] ass and anyone she brings with her.” 

17. 

Respondent then talked about “stuff” she had against TEAMS – Charter 

School and threatened to file a lawsuit. While doing so, she repeatedly stated “I don’t 

give a fuck.” She also stated she knew Deborah Vallejo, the executive director, never 

liked her and explained, “I am not like the rest of these bitches here I don’t suck 

Debbie’s pussy lips.” 

18. 

Respondent eventually gathered her belongings and left the school. 

MS. TELLEZ’S STATEMENT AND TESTIMONY 

19.  Ms. Tellez was in the front office when respondent returned from her 

meeting with Mses. Granados and Perez. As respondent entered the office, she told 

everyone she had been fired. She “was very upset,” mumbling to herself, and said “how

can these bitches do this to me.” She was pacing back-and-forth as she made several 

phone calls. Her demeanor appeared “very angry,” and her facial expressions “looked 

mad.” 

20.  On June 21, 2021, respondent called Ms. Tellez’s personal cell phone to 

request help retrieving personal property she had left at TEAM Charter Bianchi. 

Respondent also tried to tell Ms. Tellez what had happened four days prior. She 

7

explained that Ms. Granados had used hand gestures that were disrespectful, so she 

told Ms. Granados to leave the portable they were in. Ms. Granados would not leave, 

and respondent asked Ms. Perez to tell “that bitch to get out of the office” and said, 

“I’ll beat her ass if she doesn’t leave[,] I’m done with her[,] I don’t want to talk to her[,] 

she’s dead to me.”

COREY GRAVES’S STATEMENT

21.  Mr. Graves was an instructional aide at TEAM Charter Bianchi who was 

with Ms. Tellez when respondent called on June 21, 2021. Ms. Tellez answered the call 

using her cell phone’s speakerphone unbeknownst to respondent, and Mr. Graves 

overheard the entire conversation. He later prepared a written statement summarizing 

the conversation.

22.  Mr. Graves did not testify at hearing, but complainant offered his 

statement as administrative hearsay. It was marked as Exhibit 6. Respondent objected 

to Exhibit 6 on hearsay and privacy grounds. The hearsay objection was overruled. 

After listening to the parties’ arguments, the privacy objection was taken under 

submission. 

23. 

Respondent’s privacy objection is sustained. Exhibit 6 is not admitted for 

any purpose. (Pen. Code, § 632, subd. (d) [”[E]vidence obtained as a result of 

eavesdropping upon . . . a confidential communication in violation of this section is not 

admissible in any . . . administrative . . . proceeding”], abrogated on other grounds by 

 (2019) 8 Cal.5th 673, 681 [concluding the exclusionary provision of 

Pen. Code, § 632, subd. (d), was repealed in criminal proceedings by the enactment of 

Cal. Const., art. I, § 28]; see 

 (N.D.Cal. 2020) 457 

F.Supp.3d 797, 827 [“’California courts interpret “eavesdrop,” as used in section 632, to 

8

refer to a third [

] party secretly listening to a conversation between two other 

parties.’ [Citations.]”].) 

RESPONDENT’S TESTIMONY 

24. 

Respondent was not aware of any incidents or negative reviews of her 

work that would explain TEAM – Charter School’s decision to non-reelect her for the 

2020/2021 school year. She never received any performance evaluations, and she was 

promoted after one year. 

25. 

Respondent did not know she was being non-reelected when 

Ms. Granados first contacted her to schedule a meeting on June 17, 2021. She pressed 

Ms. Granados for more information about the purpose of the meeting because it was 

the last day of school and she needed to prioritize the meeting with other matters that 

required her attention. She eventually inferred from Ms. Granados’s responses that she 

was being non-reelected. 

26.  When Ms. Granados told respondent she was non-reelected for the 

following school year, she “just accepted” that fact and did not get upset, even though 

she believed she had good reason for being upset because she was never evaluated. 

Respondent told Mses. Granados and Perez that no one should make the situation 

awkward, and she would allow them to do whatever they needed to do. She 

requested, and received, permission to say goodbye to her staff and left the meeting 

to do so.

27.

As respondent disclosed her non-reelection to each of her staff, she 

explained she had not received any performance evaluations and “didn’t know why” 

she was being non-reelected. She speculated that her staff had spread the word that

she was fired because she subsequently received numerous phone calls asking her 

9

what had happened. Those were the phone calls Ms. Tellez saw respondent taking 

after she had returned to the front office. Respondent agreed she was mumbling to 

herself when he returned to the office, but denied cursing, punching walls, or throwing 

things. 

28. 

Respondent sat down at her computer around 4:00 p.m. and tried to 

gather her personal property. She started tearing up when she realized she could not 

access her email account, and she asked Ms. Granados for assistance. Ms. Granados 

responded by walking across the room, standing over respondent, and yelling “you 

need to get out of here, you got to go” while waving her hands in respondent’s face in 

a shooing motion. Ms. Granados “immediately” triggered respondent’s “fight or flight” 

response. 

29. 

Respondent did not remember all she said to Ms. Granados but 

remembered telling her to “get out of my face,” that Ms. Granados was “being 

disrespectful,” and she was “triggering” respondent. When Ms. Perez returned to the 

front office, respondent asked her to have Ms. Granados leave because Ms. Granados 

was “triggering” respondent. Respondent denied approaching Ms. Granados with 

clenched fists. 

30. 

Respondent was not certain about what she said to Ms. Perez after 

Ms. Granados left the front office, but admitted she was “venting” because she 

thought Ms. Perez was a friend. She further admitted using “inappropriate words out 

of anger,” but denied threatening anyone. She explained she calmed down after 

Ms. Granados left because Ms. Granados was the “trigger.” 

31. 

Respondent has since moved to Maryland because she thought she 

would not get a job in California. She is currently employed but declined to say where 

10 

or in what capacity. She does not know if she will return to California to teach in the 

future, but she currently has no intent to return to California. 

Analysis 

RESPONDENT’S JUNE 17 AND 21, 2021 BEHAVIOR

32. 

Respondent’s initial conduct on June 17, 2021—brusquely ending the 

morning’s phone call and interrupting Ms. Granados during the afternoon non-

reelection meeting—is not conduct that could subject respondent’s credentials to 

discipline. Though the manner in which respondent terminated the telephone 

conversation may have been terse, it was understandable given that she had likely just 

learned she was losing her job. Similarly, her interruption of Ms. Granados may have 

been curt, but it was also understandable because she had just learned she lost her 

job. 

33.  However, the clear and convincing evidence established that respondent 

engaged in unprofessional conduct, immoral conduct, and acts of moral turpitude 

after she lost access to her school email account and Ms. Granados handed her a 

business card with IT’s email address. Though she may have been disappointed about

losing her job and frustrated with not being able to access her school email account, 

her behavior went well beyond that which would have been a reasonable reaction. 

34.

Respondent launched into a verbal tirade against Mses. Granados and 

Perez. Her conduct included aggressive body language, foul language, and multiple 

threats of physical violence against Ms. Granados. Respondent yelled loud enough that 

Ms. Perez was able to hear her outside, about 20 feet from the front office. Ms.

Granados’s attempts to de-escalate the situation by moving away from respondent

and sitting down, admitting fault, apologizing, and leaving were unsuccessful. 

11 

35. 

Respondent continued her tirade after Ms. Granados had left the office.

She continued using foul language, repeated her threats of violence against 

Ms. Granados, and referred to the executive director in a crude manner. The passage 

of four days did not deescalate the intensity of respondent’s emotions, and she 

continued using foul language and threatening Ms. Granados during a telephone 

conversation with Ms. Tellez. 

36. 

Respondent’s denial that she engaged in the behavior described above 

was not persuasive. Though she denied cussing or threatening anyone, she admitted 

using “inappropriate words out of anger” without specifying what he said. She also 

admitted Ms. Granados triggered her “fight or flight” response, she asked Ms. Perez to 

have Ms. Granados leave because Ms. Granados was “triggering” her, and she was 

“venting” to Ms. Perez. The use of those terms is more consistent with an aggressive, 

hostile reaction than a calm, measured one. And even assuming, without deciding, that 

Ms. Granados acted in the manner respondent described, such behavior did not justify 

respondent’s vitriolic response, particularly once Ms. Granados had left the office and 

four days later. 

FITNESS TO TEACH 

37. 

The Commission may take adverse action against a credential only when 

the underlying conduct demonstrates an unfitness to teach. (See 

).) The California Supreme Court has delineated factors for determining whether 

 (2010) 184 Cal.App.4th 462, 473 (hereafter 

misconduct demonstrates an unfitness to teach. (See 

(1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 229–230 [analyzing former Ed. Code, § 13202, 

predecessor to Ed. Code, § 44421].) The Commission adopted the 

 factors by 

12 

enacting California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80302. “Only the pertinent 

 factors need to be analyzed.” (

, 

, 184 Cal.App.4th at p. 476.)

Likelihood of Adverse Effect 

38. 

Students are impressionable, and many try to emulate their teachers. 

Therefore, it is essential that a teacher’s behavior be beyond reproach, and she be 

capable of exercising sound judgment. She must be even-tempered. This is even more 

true when the teacher is a school administrator because she is responsible for 

modeling good behavior for her staff in addition to her students. Respondent 

exercised extremely poor judgment, was overly aggressive, and was inappropriately 

hostile during her interactions with Mses. Granados, Perez, and Tellez discussed above. 

39. 

Being an effective teacher requires one to command the respect of 

others, and one cannot gain the respect of others if one does not show respect 

oneself. Respondent’s mistreatment of Mses. Granados, Perez, and Tellez 

demonstrated a complete lack of respect for them. 

40. 

Respondent’s argument that no students were present during her 

interactions with Mses. Granados, Perez, or Tellez misses the point. The 

factor for adverse effect focuses on the likelihood that respondent’s misconduct may 

have adversely affected students or teachers, not whether it actually affected them. 

(

, 

, 184 Cal.App.4th 462, 477.) Additionally, staff witnessed respondent’s 

behavior. 

Proximity in Time 

41. 

A little more than one year elapsed between respondent’s misconduct 

and the administrative hearing. Her misconduct was not too remote in time. (See, e.g., 

13 

, 

, 184 Cal.App.4th at p. 477 [concluding misconduct that occurred six 

years before the administrative hearing “was not remote in time”].) 

Type of Credential 

42. 

Respondent holds a single subject teaching credential that allows her to 

provide “instruction for English language development in grades twelve and below, 

including preschool, and in classes organized primarily for adults.” She may teach in a 

self-contained classroom, so she may be the only teacher for students for the duration 

of an assignment. Therefore, it is imperative that respondent exemplify the behavior 

society wants emulated by students, possess sound judgment, have respect for, and 

command respect of, others, and be able to foster productive relationships. 

Praiseworthiness or Blameworthiness 

43. 

There was nothing praiseworthy about engaging in a verbal tirade 

involving hostility, obscenity, and physical threats.

Likelihood of Recurrence 

44. 

Respondent’s failure to admit the full extent of her behavior raises a 

reasonable inference that she does not recognize its inappropriate nature, and thus 

that she is likely to engage in that or similar behavior in the future. 

Adverse Effect on Constitutional Rights 

45. 

There is no risk that disciplining respondent’s credentials will adversely 

impact or have a chilling effect on her constitutional rights because threats of physical

violence do not qualify as “constitutionally protected speech.” (

(2001) 

14 

26 Cal.4th 221, 235.) Obscenity does not qualify as protected speech. (

. 

(2004) 33 Cal.4th 620, 634.) 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

Applicable Burden/Standard of Proof 

1. 

Complainant has the burden of proving the grounds for discipline 

alleged in the Accusation by clear and convincing evidence to a reasonable certainty. 

(

(1983) 33 Cal.3d 532, 536 [an administrative 

agency seeking to discipline a license has the burden of proving the grounds for 

discipline alleged in the accusation]; see 

 (1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1036, 1039–1040 [recognizing that the clear and 

convincing evidence standard applies to disciplining a teaching credential].) “The 

courts have defined clear and convincing evidence as evidence which is so clear as to 

leave no substantial doubt and as sufficiently strong to command the unhesitating 

assent of every reasonable mind [citations]. It has been said that a preponderance calls 

for probability, while clear and convincing proof demands a 

[citations].” (

. (1978) 83 Cal.App.3d 890, 899; italics original.)

Applicable Law 

2. 

The California Supreme Court has recognized that the terms “immoral 

conduct” and “unprofessional conduct” substantially overlap one another and that 

conduct which constitutes one, often includes the other. (See 

, 

, 1 Cal.3d 214, 221, fn. 9.) “Unprofessional conduct” includes “’that 

which violates the rules or ethical code of a profession or such conduct which is 

unbecoming a member of a profession in good standing.’” (

15 

 
In describing what constitutes “immoral conduct” within the context of the Education 

 (1953) 41 Cal.2d 546, 553, quoting 66 Corpus Juris, p. 55.) 

Code, the court in 

 (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, said: 

In 

, 36 Cal.2d 734, at page 

740 [227 P.2d 449], the Supreme Court quotes with 

approval the following statement from Words and Phrases, 

permanent edition, volume 20, pages 159-160: “The term 

‘immoral’ has been defined generally as that which is hostile 

to the welfare of the general public and contrary to good 

morals. Immorality has not been confined to sexual matters, 

but includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or 

indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; 

or as willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral 

indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the 

community, and as an inconsiderate attitude toward good 

order and the public welfare.” 

(

., at p. 811.)

3. 

The court in 

 (2011) 194 Cal.App.4th 1454, said the following about the 

definition of immoral or unprofessional conduct:

Moreover, the definition of immoral or unprofessional 

conduct must be considered in conjunction with the unique 

position of public school teachers, upon whom are imposed 

16 

“responsibilities and limitations on freedom of action which 

do not exist in regard to other callings.” [Citation.]

(

., at p. 1466.) 

4. 

The following has been said about the analysis for determining whether 

particular conduct constitutes sufficient cause for taking adverse action against a 

credential:

, 66 Cal.App. 157, 168 [225 

P. 783], quoted in 

, 41 Cal.2d 

546, 553-554 [261 P.2d 261], found that the standards for 

judging the propriety of a teacher’s conduct, and the extent 

to which that conduct may be the basis for the revocation 

of a credential, involves many aspects.“. . . [

] the teacher 

is entrusted with the custody of children and their high 

preparation for useful life. His habits, his speech, his good 

name, his cleanliness, the wisdom and propriety of his 

unofficial utterances, his associations, all are involved. His 

ability to inspire children and to govern them, his power as 

a teacher, and the character for which he stands are matters 

of major concern in a teacher’s selection and retention.”

(

(1972) 22 Cal.App.3d 988, 991.) 

Cause for Discipline 

5. 

The Commission shall discipline a credential for unprofessional conduct.

(Ed. Code, § 44421.) Respondent engaged in unprofessional conduct as discussed in 

17 

Factual Findings 32 through 36. Such conduct demonstrates an unfitness to teach as 

explained in Factual Findings 37 through 45. Therefore, cause exists to discipline 

respondent’s credentials pursuant to Education Code section 44421 for such conduct.

6. 

The Commission shall discipline a credential for immoral conduct. (Ed. 

Code, § 44421.) Respondent engaged in immoral conduct as discussed in Factual 

Findings 32 through 36. Such conduct demonstrates an unfitness to teach as explained 

in Factual Findings 37 through 45. Therefore, cause exists to discipline respondent’s 

credentials pursuant to Education Code section 44421 for such conduct.

7. 

The Commission shall discipline a credential if the holder engaged in 

conduct that would have constituted cause to deny an application for a credential or 

to renew a credential. (Ed. Code, § 44421.) An application for a credential or to renew a 

credential may be denied for acts of moral turpitude. (Ed. Code, § 44345, subd. (e).) 

Respondent engaged in acts of moral turpitude as discussed in Factual Findings 32

through 36. Such conduct demonstrates an unfitness to teach as explained in Factual 

Findings 37 through 45. Therefore, cause exists to discipline her credentials pursuant 

to Education Code section 44421 as that statute relates to Education Code section 

44345, subdivision (e). 

Conclusion

8. 

Cause exists to discipline respondent’s credentials for the reasons 

explained in Legal Conclusions 5 through 7, individually and collectively. Respondent 

did not introduce sufficient evidence of her continued ability to perform the duties 

and responsibilities of a public school teacher in a manner consistent with public 

health, safety, and welfare. Therefore, her credentials should be revoked. 

18 

ORDER 

Respondent Jamil Wells’s single subject teaching credential and all other 

credentials, certificates, and authorizations the Commission issued her are REVOKED. 

DATE: September 23, 2022

COREN D. WONG 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings

19 

 
 
