BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Accusation Against: 

PETER ALMANZAR, Respondent 

Case No. 1-809637860 

OAH No. 2022060645 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Jami A. Teagle-Burgos, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative 

Hearings, State of California, heard this matter by videoconference on October 25, 

2022. 

Nicole M. Kennedy, Deputy Attorney General, Department of Justice, State of 

California, represented complainant, Mary Vixie Sandy, Ed.D., Executive Director, 

California Commission on Teacher Credentialing (CTC).

Ellen Doty, Attorney at Law, Rothschild Wishek & Sands LLP, represented 

respondent Peter Almanzar, who was present throughout the hearing. 

The matter was submitted on October 25, 2022.

PROTECTIVE AND SEALING ORDER 

The 2021 Findings of the Committee of Credentials, at Exhibit 5, pages A45

through A52, is subject to a protective order. Any document received as evidence in 

this matter that contains this record shall be redacted before any disclosure to the 

public. No court reporter or transcription service shall transcribe the contents of this 

record, but shall instead refer to it solely as the “2021 Findings of the Committee.” To 

protect privacy and confidential personal information from inappropriate disclosure, 

Exhibit 5, pages A45 through A52, is ordered sealed. A reviewing court, parties to this 

matter, their attorneys, and a government agency decision maker or designee under 

Government Code section 11517, may review the document subject to this order, 

provided that such documents are protected from release to the public. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Background 

1.

The CTC is responsible for the credentialing of public school teachers, 

including issuing credentials and taking adverse action1 against applicants and 

credential holders. The CTC’s Committee of Credentials (Committee) is responsible for 

1 An “adverse action” means the denial of an application for a credential, a 

private admonition, or public reproval of a credential holder, or the suspension or 

revocation of a credential. (Ed. Code, § 44000.5.) 

2

 
investigating alleged acts or omissions that may be cause for the CTC to take adverse 

action. 

2. 

The CTC issued respondent a Crosscultural, Language, and Academic 

Development Certificate (certificate) on October 8, 2007. The certificate does not have 

an expiration date.

3. 

The CTC originally issued respondent a Level II Education Specialist 

Instruction Credential (credential) on November 29, 2005. An Added Authorization in 

Autism Spectrum Disorder was issued on March 26, 2015. The credential will expire on 

December 1, 2025, unless renewed. 

4. 

The CTC previously issued respondent a Certificate of Clearance on 

March 13, 2003, which expired on April 1, 2008, and an Intern Education Specialist

Instruction Credential, on November 3, 2003, which expired on December 1, 2005. 

5. 

At its November 17 through 19, 2021, meeting, as documented in a letter 

dated April 30, 2021, the Committee found probable cause to recommend the 

revocation of respondent’s credential and certificate. The findings were based on 

allegations relating to respondent’s misdemeanor convictions in 2019 for public 

intoxication and disturbance by loud or unreasonable noise, and respondent’s two 

misdemeanor convictions in 2021 for driving under the influence (DUI). Respondent 

timely requested an administrative hearing.

6. 

On March 21, 2022, complainant signed the accusation alleging 

respondent’s underlying conduct resulted in the aforementioned convictions. As 

causes for discipline, complainant alleges respondent committed unprofessional 

conduct, immoral conduct, and acts of moral turpitude, and respondent demonstrated 

3

an addiction to intoxicating beverages and evident unfitness for service. Complainant 

seeks the revocation of respondent’s credential and certificate. 

7. 

Respondent timely filed a notice of defense, and this hearing followed. 

Respondent’s Criminal Convictions and Underlying Conduct 

2021 CONVICTION FOR DUI 

8. 

A police report by Officer William Deutsch at the California Highway 

Patrol (CHP) was received pursuant to 

(1997) 16 Cal.4th 448.2 On June 13, 

2020, Officer Deutsch responded to a solo traffic collision along the 405 freeway in 

Irvine. A vehicle driven by respondent had gone down an embankment. Officer 

Deutsch observed respondent had slurred speech, watery eyes, and a strong odor of 

an alcoholic beverage. Respondent admitted to drinking two alcoholic beverages. 

Respondent was unable to stand unassisted, could not perform any field sobriety tests, 

and thought he was in San Diego. Officer Deutsch arrested respondent for driving 

2 In 

, California Supreme Court concluded that direct observations 

memorialized in a police officer’s report were admissible under Evidence Code section 

1280, the public employee records exception to the hearsay rule, and were sufficient to 

support a factual finding. The court further concluded that admissions by a party 

memorialized in such a report were admissible under Evidence Code section 1220 and 

were sufficient to support a factual finding. Citing Government Code section 11513, 

the court held that other hearsay statements set forth in the police officer’s report 

could be used to supplement or explain other evidence, but they were not sufficient, 

by themselves, to support a factual finding, unless the hearsay evidence would be 

admissible over objection in civil actions. 

4

 
under the influence and driving at an unsafe speed. Respondent submitted to blood 

testing at the CHP office, which determined his blood alcohol concentration (BAC) 

level was 0.36 percent. 

9. 

On June 29, 2021, in the Superior Court of California, County of Orange, 

Case No. 20HM07305, respondent was convicted on his guilty plea of violating Vehicle 

Code sections 23152, subdivision (a), driving under the influence of alcohol, and 

23152, subdivision (b), driving with a BAC of 0.08 percent or more, both 

misdemeanors. The court placed respondent on informal probation for five years. 

2021 CONVICTION FOR DUI 

10. 

A police report by Officer K. Bicskei of the Irvine Police Department was 

received pursuant to 

On November 29, 2019, the Orange County Fire 

Authority (OCFA) observed respondent driving and swerving across lanes on Portola 

Parkway in Irvine before pulling into a private property area. OCFA believed 

respondent may have suffered a medical emergency and followed him to provide 

assistance. OCFA observed respondent had slurred speech and an odor an alcoholic 

beverage emitted from the sunroof of respondent’s vehicle. Paramedics transported 

respondent to a hospital due to him having an altered mental state and low blood 

sugar. Officer Bicskei went to the hospital to speak with respondent who reported he 

passed out in his car. Respondent had slurred speech and Officer Bicskei asked if he 

had been drinking. Respondent replied that he wanted to speak with a lawyer. 

Respondent refused to answer most of Officer Bicskei’s questions and refused to 

cooperate in field sobriety testing. Respondent submitted to a Preliminary Alcohol 

Screening (PAS) test, but he appeared to block the tube with his teeth and tongue.

Officer Bicskei arrested respondent for driving under the influence of an alcoholic 

beverage, which was based on Officer Bicskei’s observations of respondent having 

5

slurred speech and an odor of an alcoholic beverage, and the observations of OCFA.

Respondent submitted to blood testing at the hospital, which determined his blood 

alcohol concentration (BAC) level was 0.25 percent. 

11.  On June 29, 2021, in the Superior Court of California, County of Orange, 

Case No. 20HM03866, respondent was convicted on his guilty plea of violating Vehicle 

Code sections 23152, subdivision (a), driving under the influence of alcohol, and 

23152, subdivision (b), driving with a BAC of 0.08 percent or more, both 

misdemeanors, and with an enhancement for violating Vehicle Code section 23538, 

subdivision (b)(2), driving with a BAC of 0.20 percent or more. The court placed 

respondent on informal probation for three years. 

2019 CONVICTION FOR DISTURBING BY LOUD OR UNREASONABLE NOISE 

AND TESTIMONY OF OFFICER ELLISON 

12. 

A police report submitted by Officer Robert Ellison of the Anaheim Police 

Department was received pursuant to 

 Officer Ellison testified at the 

hearing, and his testimony is consistent with his police report. On March 3, 2019, 

Officer Ellison and officers responded to a report of a male, identified as respondent, 

lying on the roadway with a young child who was identified as respondent’s son. A 

witness reported that he was driving on Weir Canyon Road – a very busy road – when 

he saw respondent lying on the sidewalk with a baby underneath him. Respondent 

reported he was trying to sleep, and he “messed up.” Officer Ellison observed 

woodchips on the backs of the jackets of respondent and his son, and respondent had 

a strong odor of an alcoholic beverage, slurred speech, and he was swaying while 

holding his son. At one point, respondent dropped his son who fell onto the sidewalk 

and sustained a slight abrasion above his eyebrow. Respondent stated he lived nearby, 

but when he was asked where he was coming from, he replied, “My bad.” Officer 

6

Ellison reported respondent “eventually fell onto his back and stopped answering 

questions.” Officer Ellison released the child to his mother, and arrested respondent 

for public intoxication and child endangerment. 

13.  On December 12, 2019, in the Superior Court of California, County of 

Orange, Case No. 19NM03487, respondent was convicted on his guilty plea of 

violating of Penal Code section 415(2), disturbance by loud and unreasonable noise, a 

misdemeanor. The court dismissed the remaining charges for violating Penal Code 

sections 273, subdivision (b), willful cruelty to a child, and 647, subdivision (f), public 

intoxication. The court placed respondent on informal probation for three years. 

2019 CONVICTION FOR PUBLIC INTOXICATION AND TESTIMONY OF MS.

ARTEAGA 

14. 

A police report submitted by Officer N. Lopez of the Baldwin Park Police 

Department was received pursuant to 

 On March 31, 2018, officers 

responded to a call from a female, identified as Leslie Herrera Arteaga, reporting that 

an unknown male, identified as respondent, was sleeping on her couch. When officers 

arrived at the scene, both respondent and Ms. Arteaga were standing in front of her 

residence. Officer Lopez observed respondent had a lax face and jaw, watery eyes, 

slurred speech, and an odor of an alcoholic beverage, and he was unable to maintain 

his balance and required assistance to stand. Respondent admitted to drinking two

Modelo beers. When asked what city he was in, respondent responded, “Los Alamitos,” 

although he was in Baldwin Park. Respondent reported he entered the residence 

because the door was unlocked. Officer Lopez reported that Ms. Arteaga called her 

father who arrived and escorted respondent out of the residence. Officer Lopez 

determined respondent was under the influence of alcohol and unable to care for 

himself, and he arrested respondent for public intoxication.

7

15.

On June 4, 2019, in the Superior Court of California, County of Los 

Angeles, Case No. 8EM02605, respondent was convicted on his plea of nolo 

contendere of violating of Penal Code section 647, subdivision (f), public intoxication, a 

misdemeanor. On June 4, 2018, respondent was placed on a one-year pretrial 

diversion program, which was diverted on June 4, 2019. He was placed on summary 

probation for one year, and ordered to attend 52 Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) 

meetings and pay fines and fees. 

16. 

The following is a summary of the testimony of Leslie Herrera Arteaga. 

On March 31, 2018, she was driving and approached her residence, and she noticed 

respondent was driving behind her and parked his vehicle a few cars behind her 

vehicle. She observed respondent exit from his vehicle faster than she did, and he 

entered her residence through an open garage door. Her parents had left the garage 

door open because she was on the way home. She thought maybe respondent was a 

friend of her parents or a handyman. She did not recognize him. She entered the 

house, and respondent was sleeping on the couch with a pillow. She said, “Hello,” and 

he was unresponsive. Her immediate reaction was “fear” because respondent’s actions 

were not normal or appropriate. She knew that her brother was upstairs, so she called 

him and told him to leave. She called her parents who returned to the residence. Her 

father and a neighbor entered the residence and carried respondent out to the front of 

the residence. She noted respondent was not talking and showed “no coherency,” as 

he looked like he was “a few seconds from passing out.” He was “not responsive at all” 

when the police arrived. 

Respondent’s 2007 Suspension by the CTC 

17.  On August 9, 2007, the CTC suspended respondent’s credentials and 

certifications for a period of 14 days because he failed to disclose that criminal charges 

8

were pending against him due to his arrest for DUI on July 7, 2006, and he failed to 

disclose that he suffered DUI convictions in 2004 and 1996. 

Respondent’s Testimony 

18. 

The following is a summary of the testimony of respondent. He has been 

an educator for 25 years in California. He was an instructional assistant for eight years, 

and the remaining years he has been a special education teacher. He is a “mild-

moderate education specialist” and he holds an autism certificate. He provides 

supplemental instruction in social studies and health science. He co-teaches at Willard 

Intermediate School in Santa Ana. He works in a grade seven class that he shares with 

a general education co-teacher. He integrates special education students with general 

education students. It is a collaborative model that is written into the Individualized 

Education Plan (IEP) for each of his students. He enjoys working with his students in 

this program, called “Promise,” because most of them are at a grade two level in 

reading and math but it does not mean they cannot hold a job later in life. One 

summer, he visited the family of each incoming student in grade six and it set the tone 

for them when they entered middle school. He believes that one day schools will all be 

online, but he knows that special education students will always need to physically 

attend school. The “burn out rate” for special education teachers is five to seven years, 

but it “comes naturally” to him. He has been nominated for “teacher of the year” a 

couple of times. The school administrators and his teacher colleagues have always 

appreciated him. He usually coaches a few sport teams at school, each year, but last 

year a student asked him to be the advisor for the business club and it was a “cool 

experience” because he tried something new. He has volunteered at lunch, twice a 

week, for the last 10 years. He has done this because he wants people to see him at 

lunch and see that he is not drinking. 

9

19. 

Respondent stated he was at the hearing because he has “alcohol use 

disorder.” He thinks of his condition as being an allergic reaction because even if he 

consumes half of a beer – “thing go awry.” He cannot take a sip of alcohol. He cannot 

have a toast of alcohol at a wedding. He is fully abstaining from consuming alcohol. 

He has never consumed alcohol at work, and he has never missed work because of 

alcohol. He has never been disciplined by his district due to his conduct in the 

classroom. 

20.  When asked about his past disciplinary action by the CTC in 2007, and 

what has changed, he testified that he stopped drinking for a period of time, but he 

started drinking again and he “completely regrets it.” He had nightmares for six 

months after the incident with his son. He wishes that he would have completely 

stopped drinking and would have not relapsed. He did not change until he had an 

“awakening” when his doctor told him, in January 2022, that he had “severe alcohol 

use disorder.” He realized that he had to move forward. He was voluntarily admitted to 

a sober living home where he stayed from January 2022 until April 2022, and he 

submitted to random alcohol and drug screenings. After he was discharged from the 

sober living home, he went to live with his mother where he continues to reside. He 

has changed his approach to AA this time around. He “worked the entire 12 steps” and 

he trusted others who went through the steps and takes their suggestions. He has “full 

acceptance” and he wakes up each day to a “higher power” and says the Serenity and 

Set-Aside Prayers. He is committed to his AA group and is a secretary and sets up 

meetings. He meets with his AA sponsor once a month, and he has four close AA 

associates who have helped him get through this period in his life. He completed an 

18-month course to regain his driver’s license, and he is driving again. He was 

“extremely selfish with [his] loved ones.” He stated, “Words can’t explain what it did to 

my Mom – she hoped I would have stopped years ago. It damaged [my] relationship 

10 

with folks. It continued [with] . . . my job being on the line.” He said, “It’s horrific that I 

put my son in a position like that. It was horrible . . . I had nightmares that I smashed 

his face, and I’m grateful that he’ll never have to see me like that.” He felt horrified at 

what he did to Ms. Arteaga, and stated, “Thank God I’m not a violent person and I 

didn’t wake up and attack her . . . I wanted to shut off my camera [during the hearing] 

in case she had problems looking at me. But it was necessary for me to listen.” He is 

“not that person” any more. He stated that when he reads the reports about his 

alcohol-related incidents, he can finally see “that was me . . . [the] one singular thing 

was alcohol.” His sobriety date is January 7, 2022. He added that having his son has 

been the “best thing that happened to me.” His son is now four years old and he has 

custody of him each week from Tuesday to Sunday. 

21. 

The testimony of respondent was contrite and forthright. 

Respondent’s Supporting Evidence and Witness Testimony 

22. 

Respondent voluntarily submitted to an ethyl glucuronide (EtG) nail test 

on October 1, 2022, which reveals if a patient has consumed any alcohol in the 

previous three months. Respondent’s test results were negative.

23.

Respondent submitted a document showing that his school nominated 

him for Teacher of the Year in 2007.

24. 

The following is a summary of the testimony by Bertha Benavides-Lopez, 

which is consistent with her letter of support. She has been in the field of education for 

24 years. She has been issued credentials in multiple subject, single subject in Spanish 

literature, administrative, and student drop-out. She has worked as an adjunct 

professor in the teacher credential program at Pepperdine University. She is currently 

the principal at Willard Intermediate School. She is respondent’s immediate supervisor. 

11 

She observes him during walk-throughs in the classroom, at IEP meetings, special 

events, and when he is a student chaperone and lunch volunteer. Respondent is “very 

interactive, loving, respectful, attentive to detail” with his students and their needs. She 

has never seen respondent be in an unsafe situation at work. He is a reliable employee. 

He puts his name on the list to cover for other teachers and he is a club advisor. 

Respondent is a credentialed special education teacher, which allows him to bring his 

students into a general education setting in a collaborative model with mainstream 

teachers. It would be especially drastic to lose respondent at her school site. The 

schools are struggling to get special education teachers. She has never had a concern 

about whether respondent can do his job. She is aware of his four alcohol-related 

convictions. She is not concerned about respondent because he is a professional at 

school, and the students come first – if she sees anything, she will be the first to report 

it. 

25.

The following is the testimony of Lloyd Bennet. He holds a mild moderate 

credential, education specialist credential, and preliminary administrative credential. 

He worked with respondent at Willard Intermediate School for 15 years. Respondent 

was a team player, always took on extra roles, worked with the students and parents, 

and always respectful with the students. He knows respondent is from the community 

of Santa Ana and wants to give back to it. He has never seen respondent under the 

influence of alcohol while teaching. He believes respondent should be able to retain 

his credential and certificate because respondent is committed to the students. Being 

a special education educator is a “special calling” and “year after year,” respondent is 

there before school, after school, and during summer. He stated it would be “hard to 

find a more dedicated educator than [respondent].”

12 

26. 

The following is a summary of the testimony of Tricia Bregman. She has 

known respondent through their AA fellowship since July 2013. In the past, respondent 

would attend meetings, then not attend meetings, come back, then stop attending, 

and come back again. However, since the beginning of 2022, respondent is different 

because he consistently attends AA meetings and he volunteers on a weekly basis to 

set up meetings. She remarked the “return rate” at AA is “not that promising . . . [and] 

people with addictions by and large don’t come back.” She explained that “coming 

back” is a “humbling experience.” She has admiration for respondent because he “did 

come back.” She has observed that respondent is now maintaining long-term and 

strong relationships, and he has a “heightened commitment.” She noticed that he has 

normal sleeping patterns now, and he is “doing what needs to get done” as far as 

going through AA. She volunteered to be a witness on behalf of respondent because 

she believes that he finally “hit his bottom” and embraced that he is an alcoholic. He is 

no longer “fighting it” and instead he has embraced his recovery.  

27. 

Respondent submitted letters of support from Errin Landry, M.Ed., 

respondent’s assistant principal at Willard Intermediate School, and Matt Popejoy, 

respondent’s AA sponsor. Respondent submitted a declaration by Michael Weber, a 

colleague of his at Willard Intermediate School. These authors wrote how respondent 

is an excellent, reliable, and trustworthy educator and person, and highly skilled in 

special education. Ms. Landry and Mr. Popejoy specifically referenced respondent’s 

struggles. Ms. Landry wrote that she was “proud of [respondent’s] dedication and 

genuine desire to continue growing and developing”. Each author wrote that they fully 

support respondent. 

13 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

Burden and Standard of Proof 

1.

Complainant bears the burden of proof of establishing that the charges 

in the accusation are true. (Evid. Code § 115.) The standard of proof in an 

administrative disciplinary action seeking the suspension or revocation of a 

professional license is clear and convincing evidence. (

(1982) 135 Cal.App.3d 853, 856.” Clear and convincing evidence requires a 

finding of high probability, or evidence so clear as to leave no substantial doubt; it 

requires sufficiently strong evidence to command the unhesitating assent of every 

reasonable mind. (

 (2005) 130 Cal.App.4th 586, 594.)

Relevant Statutes 

2. 

Education Code section 44421 permits the CTC to take adverse action 

against a credential for “immoral or unprofessional conduct” or “for any cause that 

would have warranted the denial of an application for a credential or the renewal 

thereof.”

3. 

Education Code section 44345 lists as grounds to deny any application 

for the issuance of a credential an applicant who “has committed any act involving 

moral turpitude” (subd. (e)). Any denial on the grounds of moral turpitude must “be 

based upon reasons related to the applicant’s fitness to teach or fitness to perform 

other duties for which that applicant is certificated, or competence to perform the 

duties which the credential would authorize the applicant to perform.”

14 

Moral Turpitude and Immoral Conduct 

4.

There is broad discretion in determining what constitutes immoral 

conduct in the context of teacher disciplinary matters. (

(1999) 20 Cal.4th 327.) Immoral conduct has been defined by the 

courts as follows: 

[T]hat which is hostile to the welfare of the general public 

and contrary to good morals. Immorality has not been 

confined to sexual matters, but includes conduct 

inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, 

indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; or as willful, flagrant, or 

shameless conduct showing moral indifference to the 

opinions of respectable members of the community, and as 

an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public 

welfare. (

 (1970) 9 

Cal.App.3d 967, 972, citing 

, 179 Cal. App 2d 

808, 811.)

5.

A criminal act constitutes moral turpitude if it involves a serious breach 

of a duty owed to another or society. (

 (2001) 25 Cal.4th 11, 16.) Acts of 

moral turpitude involve “bad character” and “readiness to do evil.” (

(1985) 173 Cal.App.3d 390, 400.) Moral turpitude has also been described as “any 

crime or misconduct committed without excuse, or any ‘dishonest or immoral’ act not 

necessarily a crime.” (

 (1990) 224 Cal.App.3d 1016, 

1027.) A crime of moral turpitude is “an act of baseness, vileness or depravity in the 

private and social duties which a man owes to his fellowmen, or to society in general, 

15 

 
contrary to the accepted and customary rule of right and duty between man and man.” 

(

(1938) 12 Cal.2d 93, 97.)

6. 

The second and third causes for discipline allege respondent committed 

multiple acts of moral turpitude and immoral conduct. Regarding the 2019 convictions 

for disturbance by noise and public intoxication, respondent’s conduct was acting with 

indifference to others in the community – namely his child and Ms. Arteaga.

7. 

While a drunk driving conviction does not per se establish moral 

turpitude, moral turpitude may be found depending on the circumstances surrounding 

multiple convictions for DUI. (

 (1990) 52 Cal.3d 487, 494.) In 

 (1994) 29 Cal.App.4th 1746, 1757, the court noted that repeatedly driving 

under the influence after previously having been convicted of that crime can evidence 

the sort of “conscious indifference” toward duties owed society in general that is a 

hallmark of moral turpitude.

8. 

An aggravating circumstance in this case is that respondent suffered four 

alcohol-related convictions in a two-year period, which individually and collectively, 

are acts of moral turpitude and immoral conduct.

Unprofessional Conduct 

9. 

The term “unprofessional conduct” is conduct such as to indicate 

unfitness to teach. (

 (1983) 149 

Cal.App.3d 1167, 1174.) Unprofessional conduct has been defined as “that conduct 

which breaches the rules or ethical code of a profession or conduct which is 

unbecoming a member in good standing of a profession.” (

, (1978) 81 Cal. App.3d 564, at 575; 

(1953) 41 Cal.2d 

546, 553.) 

16 

10. 

The finding that respondent engaged in immoral conduct and acts of 

moral turpitude necessitate a finding of unprofessional conduct. Respondent’s two 

DUIs, and other convictions, within a three-year period reflects a pattern of disregard 

for the law unbecoming of the profession. 

Addiction to Intoxicating Beverages

11. 

The commission may deny any application or renewal for a credential if 

an applicant is addicted to the use of intoxicating beverages to excess. (Ed. Code § 

44345, subd. (c).) Respondent’s convictions all occurred while he was intoxicated from 

alcohol consumption. At the time of his convictions, respondent was addicted to 

alcohol. He was forthcoming and now accepts he is an “alcoholic” and he is committed 

to his sobriety.

Relationship to Fitness to Teach 

12. 

Any adverse action on the grounds that respondent committed an act of 

moral turpitude must be based upon reasons related to the applicant’s fitness to 

teach. (Ed. Code, § 44345.) The statutory definition of immoral conduct “must be 

considered in conjunction with the unique position of public school teachers, upon 

whom are imposed ‘responsibilities and limitations on freedom of action which do not 

exist in regard to other callings.’” (

(2011) 194 Cal.App.4th 1454, 1466) [citation omitted].) 

13. 

In 

(1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 235, the 

Supreme Court delineated the following criteria to determine whether a teacher’s 

conduct indicates that he or she is not fit to teach: (1) the likelihood that the conduct 

may have adversely affected students or fellow teachers; (2) the degree of such 

adversity anticipated; (3) the proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct; (4) the 

17 

type of teaching certificate held by the teacher; (5) the extenuating or aggravating 

circumstances, if any, surrounding the conduct in question; (6) the praiseworthiness or 

blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the conduct; (7) the likelihood of the 

recurrence of the conduct in question; and (8) the extent to which disciplinary action 

may inflict an adverse impact or have a chilling effect upon the constitutional rights of 

the teacher involved or other teachers. (

. at pp. 229-230.) Not all the 

factors must be considered, only the most pertinent ones. (

(1993) 16 Cal.App.4th 1766, 1777.) 

Additionally, the 

 factors may be applied to all the charges in the aggregate. 

(

(1992) 2 

Cal.App.4th 1429,1456-1457.) The determination of fitness for service required by 

 is a factual one. (

at fn. 3); (

 (1988) 

45 Cal.3d. 208, 220-221; 

(1994) 28 Cal.App.4th 369, 384.) For 

purposes of taking adverse action against a teaching credential, the factors 

enumerated in 

have been codified in regulation. (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 

80302.) 

14. 

In considering the relevant 

 factors in conjunction with the 

sustained allegations the following conclusions are reached.

THE LIKELIHOOD THAT THE CONDUCT MAY HAVE ADVERSELY AFFECTED 

STUDENTS, FELLOW TEACHERS, OR THE EDUCATIONAL COMMUNITY, AND THE 

DEGREE OF SUCH ADVERSITY ANTICIPATED 

15. 

There was no evidence that any parents, students, or teachers were aware 

of respondent’s convictions or that there was any notoriety associated with the 

convictions. While there was no evidence that news of respondent’s convictions has 

reached fellow teachers or students, that is not to say that the possibility that this 

18 

 
information would come to light in the future is remote. Criminal records are easily 

accessible online, and it would not be beyond more than a hypothetical possibility that 

a student, parent, or another teacher could discover respondent’s criminal past. It is 

axiomatic that teachers are role models for students. (

(1953) 41 Cal 2d.546, 552.) Their knowledge of the existence of 

the conviction would certainly be adverse to an appropriate and productive learning 

environment. However, this factor provides little bearing on respondent’s fitness to 

teach because it is speculative that a parent or student might find out about 

respondent’s convictions. 

THE PROXIMITY OR REMOTENESS IN TIME OF THE CONDUCT 

16. 

The misconduct in question occurred from 2018 through 2020. The most 

recent convictions occurred one-and-a-half years ago, and respondent remains on 

criminal probation. The events were therefore not remote in time. (

remote in time where the CTC took action against the credential three years after the 

, (2010) 184 Cal.App.4th 462, 477 [conduct was not 

criminal conduct occurred].) 

EXTENUATING OR AGGRAVATING CIRCUMSTANCES

17. 

California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80300 provides definitions 

for aggravating and mitigating factors which demonstrates that a greater or more 

lenient degree of adverse action for an act of professional misconduct is needed to 

adequately protect the public, schoolchildren or the profession. These factors are 

instructive, but not exhaustive, in evaluating extenuating or aggravating circumstances 

related to fitness to teach. 

Aggravating factors include:

19 

(1) a prior record of adverse action including the nature and 

extent of that record; 

(2) that the misconduct evidences multiple acts of 

wrongdoing or demonstrate a pattern of misconduct; 

(3) that the misconduct was surrounded by or followed by 

bad faith, dishonesty or other violation of the laws 

governing educators; 

(4) that the misconduct significantly harmed a child 

entrusted to the care of a credential holder or applicant, 

significantly harmed the public or the educational system; 

(5) that the holder or applicant demonstrated indifference 

toward the consequence of the misconduct, which includes 

failure to comply with known court orders; or 

(6) that the holder or applicant had prior notice, warnings 

or reprimands for similar conduct from any reliable source. 

(

at subd. (b).)

Mitigating factors include: 

(1) absence of any prior record of adverse action over many 

years of educational service, coupled with present

misconduct which is not deemed most serious; 

(2) lack of harm to the person who is the object of the 

misconduct; 

20 

(3) emotional or physical difficulties suffered by the holder 

or applicant which substantially contributed to the 

misconduct; provided that the difficulties were not the 

product of illegal conduct by the credential holder or 

applicant, such as illegal drug or substance abuse; and 

further provided that the credential holder or applicant has 

established through clear and convincing evidence that he 

or she no longer has such difficulties; 

(4) a demonstration of good character of the applicant or 

holder attested to by references from the educational 

community or the general community from individuals 

aware of the extent of the applicant's or holder's 

misconduct; 

(5) objective action taken by the applicant or holder, 

spontaneously demonstrating remorse at the time of the 

misconduct, and recognition of the wrongdoing which is 

designed to timely make amends for the consequences of 

the misconduct;

(6) the proximity or remoteness in time relative to the 

seriousness of the misconduct; or

(7) the nature and extent of subsequent rehabilitation. (

at subd. (m).) 

18. 

There are aggravating factors involving respondent’s misconduct. There 

are multiple acts of wrongdoing that demonstrate a pattern of misconduct: 

21 

Respondent suffered four alcohol-related convictions within three years, and the CTC 

suspended respondent in 2007 for 14 days for similar conduct, yet he did not rectify 

his behavior in response to this previous disciplinary action. 

19. 

In mitigation, no individual was harmed by respondent’s misconduct, 

with the exception of his son who suffered a slight abrasion on his forehead and Ms. 

Arteaga who was terrified by a drunk stranger entering her residence. Respondent is 

highly involved in the education community and appears to be respected by his peers, 

and those who testified and wrote letters of support were aware of respondent’s 

misconduct. It is recognized that respondent has initiated the process of rehabilitation 

beyond what was ordered by the court by regularly attending AA, being more 

committed to his AA fellowship as a secretary, voluntarily residing at a sober living 

home for three months, and working with his AA sponsor. 

THE LIKELIHOOD OF THE RECURRENCE OF THE CONDUCT IN QUESTION

20. 

Fully acknowledging the wrongfulness of past actions is an essential step 

towards rehabilitation. (

(1989) 49 Cal.3d 933, 

940.) While a candid admission of misconduct and full acknowledgment of 

wrongdoing is a necessary step in the rehabilitation process, it is only a first step; a 

truer indication of rehabilitation is presented if an individual demonstrates by 

sustained conduct over an extended period of time that he or she is once again fit to 

teach. (

(1981) 30 Cal.3d 312, 315-316.) Respondent has a sustained 

period of rehabilitation for nearly one year. He has fully acknowledged his relapse and 

his history as an alcoholic, and he has “hit bottom” and changed his approach in his 

recovery by taking ownership of his conduct, those he has hurt from his conduct, and 

he is finally moving forward in the right direction by having a meaningful commitment 

to the AA steps and to his AA fellowship and AA sponsor. He has appeared to be 

22 

transparent with his school principals with his struggles, and commitment to his 

sobriety. He fully committed to his date of sobriety, and understands the 

consequences should he relapse again. 

21.

In consideration of the 

factors and totality of the circumstances, 

respondent’s conduct in the aggregate does not indicate a factual nexus between his 

conduct and unfitness for service.

Cause Exists to Take Adverse Action Against Respondent’s Credential 

22. 

Cause exists to take adverse action against respondent’s credential and 

certificate in that he committed acts of unprofessional conduct, immoral conduct, 

moral turpitude, and his behavior demonstrates an addiction to intoxicating 

beverages. (Ed. Code, §§ 44421; 44345, subds. (c) & (e).)

23. 

Cause does not exist to take adverse action against respondent’s 

credential and certificate as it is not evident that he is unfit for service. (Ed. Code, § 

44421.)

Appropriate Discipline 

24.

Teachers are in a unique position in that they are responsible for the care 

and training of young minds. They are role models to their students in and out of the 

classroom. We expect teachers to be honest and trustworthy.

25. 

Licensing disciplinary matters like this are not designed to punish an 

individual. (

 (1979) 95 Cal.App.3d 161, 165.) Rather, a licensing 

agency should be primarily concerned with protecting the public. (

 (1995) 38 Cal.App.4th 810, 817.) In this regard, rehabilitation is an 

important consideration. (

 (1981) 29 Cal.3d 120, 124-125.)

23 

26. 

The appropriate level of discipline that ensures the public’s protection is 

to place respondent on probation for five years with the CTC’s probation monitor 

having the ability to have respondent submit to random drug and/or alcohol screens. 

27.  While respondent’s most recent DUI convictions were in 2021 and his 

criminal probation is not scheduled to terminate until 2026, the evidence of his 

commitment to his sobriety and other mitigating factors outweighs the recentness of 

his convictions and sobriety. Respondent is in the early stages of his rehabilitation, as 

he has been sober since January 2022. However, he has successfully completed a 

voluntary sober living program and demonstrates meaningful commitment and 

involvement in his AA program. His AA fellow participant testified regarding the 

difference in respondent’s recent sobriety compared to his last period of sobriety 

when he was not truly committed to AA and he suffered a relapse in 2018. The AA 

fellow participant has known respondent since 2013, and she was keenly aware that his 

commitment to his sobriety and to AA is different this time and he has accepted his 

alcoholism in order to move forward and stay sober. 

28. 

This case entails respondent’s relapse in his alcohol addiction from 2018 

until 2020, after he had been able to sustain a long period of sobriety for 12 years 

from 2006 until 2018. Respondent’s suspension by the CTC in 2007 for similar conduct 

occurred a long time ago between 1996 and 2006. Unfortunately, in 2019, he suffered 

a conviction for public intoxication in 2018. His relapse continued for the next two 

years when he suffered three more alcohol-related convictions for his conduct in 2019 

and 2020. However, respondent was able to become sober again in January 2022 when 

he had a wake-up call from his doctor, and he has maintained his sobriety to this day.  

29. 

Respondent had three strong character witnesses who spoke about his 

commitment to his sobriety and his strong skills as a special education teacher at the 

24 

same district for many years. His AA fellow participant spoke about the notable 

difference in respondent’s recent commitment to AA. His school principal and teacher 

colleague spoke about his excellent teaching skills and dedication to the students, and 

the extra mile he goes when helping his students, including making home visits during 

the summer, volunteering at lunch, being a club advisor, and co-teaching in a 

collaborative model with his special education students in a general education setting. 

30.  Moreover, respondent has shown humility and responsibility for his 

actions that lead to his convictions, and he expressed remorse and shame for those 

that his conduct has negatively affected, including his son, his mother, and Ms. 

Arteaga – the stranger whose home he walked into and passed out on her couch. He 

discussed a positive change in his life of becoming a parent and being very involved in 

the life of his four-year-old son for whom he shares 50 percent custody. 

31. 

Based on the discussion above, it would be unduly harsh to fully revoke 

respondent’s certificate and credential and it is sufficient for public protection to place 

respondent on a lengthy probation in order for the CTC to monitor his progress and 

conduct random drug and alcohol screenings, if his probation monitor determines that 

such testing is necessary. Such a restrictive probation will ensure that respondent 

maintains his sobriety and he is held accountable to the CTC.

32. 

Finally, respondent is strongly urged to make every effort to maintain his 

sobriety and comply with each and every term of his probation, as he will not likely be 

afforded a similar grace, should he violate any term of his probation. 

33. 

In conclusion, cause was established for discipline of respondent’s 

credential and certificate, but not revocation. Respondent’s convictions had no adverse 

impact on the educational community, did not involve students, parents, or school 

25 

staff. The 

factors do not show respondent is unfit to teach. Respondent 

established a satisfactory level of rehabilitation and permitting him to continue 

teaching in the classroom would not be inconsistent with public protection provided 

that a period of probation is imposed where respondent is monitored. Therefore, 

respondent’s certificate and credential are revoked, the revocation is immediately 

stayed, and respondent’s certificate and credential are placed on probation for a 

period of five years.3 

ORDER 

All teaching credentials and certificates issued to respondent Peter Almanzar, 

including his Level II Education Specialist Instruction Credential and Crosscultural, 

Language, and Academic Development Certificate, are hereby revoked. However, the 

revocation is immediately stayed, and his teaching credential and certificate are placed 

on probation for a period of five years on the following terms: 

Severability Clause. Each condition of probation contained herein is a separate 

and distinct condition. If any condition of probation, or any application thereof, is 

declared unenforceable in whole, in part, or to any extent, the remaining conditions of 

probation, and each of them, and all other applications thereof, shall not be affected. 

Each condition of probation shall separately be valid and enforceable to the fullest 

extent permitted by law. 

3 The commission has never promulgated disciplinary guidelines although 

proposed disciplinary guidelines have been drafted.

26 

 
1. 

Obey all Laws. Respondent shall obey all federal, state, and local laws and 

regulations, including, but not limited to, the statutes and regulations of the CTC. A full 

and detailed account of any and all arrests or citations for any violation of law (except 

minor traffic offenses) shall be reported by respondent to the commission, in writing 

within 30 days of the arrest or citation. 

2. 

New Credentials Subject to Order. Any new credential issued by the CTC 

to respondent during the period of probation shall be subject to this order, and 

respondent shall be subject to the same terms and conditions of probation with 

respect to any such new credentials, as set forth herein.

3. 

Compliance with Probation. Respondent shall fully comply with the terms 

and conditions of this order and cooperate with representatives of the CTC in its 

monitoring and investigation of his compliance. 

4. 

Cooperation with CTC. During the entire period of probation, respondent 

shall fully cooperate with the CTC in its monitoring and investigation of respondent’s 

compliance with probation. 

5.

Drug and Alcohol Screening. Respondent shall submit to random drug 

and alcohol screenings during the period of probation, if the CTC designated 

probation monitor determines that such testing is necessary. Respondent shall submit 

to screenings only at screening facilities approved by the CTC designated probation 

monitor. Respondent shall pay the costs associated with such screenings. 

6. 

Abstain from Consumption of Alcohol and/or Drugs. Respondent shall 

fully abstain from any consumption of alcohol and/or drugs. 

27 

7. 

Interviews/Meetings with CTC. During the period of probation, 

respondent shall appear in-person or be available by telephone at interviews or 

meetings as directed by the CTC or its representatives upon reasonable notice. 

8. 

Notifications. The CTC shall be informed, in writing, of all employment of 

respondent that requires a credential. Respondent shall inform his employer of the 

reason for, and the terms and conditions of his probationary status and shall provide a 

copy of the CTC’s Decision to his employer and immediate supervisor. Respondent 

shall authorize his employer to submit performance evaluations and other reports 

requested by the CTC. Respondent shall notify the CTC in writing within 72 hours after 

cessation of any employment that requires a credential. The notification shall contain a 

full explanation of the circumstances surrounding the cessation of employment.

9. 

Maintain Active, Current Credentials. During the entire period of 

probation, respondent shall maintain active, current credentials with the CTC. 

10.  Maintain Current Contact Information. Respondent must provide written 

notice to the CTC within ten days of any change of residency or address. Periods of 

residency outside of California shall not apply toward completion of the probationary 

period or period of suspension. 

11.

Probation Monitoring Costs. Respondent shall pay the costs associated 

with probation monitoring, as designated by the CTC, for each year of probation. 

Probation monitoring costs shall be made payable to the California Commission on 

Teacher Credentialing. Within 30 days of the effective date of this order, respondent 

shall pay the CTC the prorated probation monitoring costs for the number of months 

remaining in the calendar year. Beginning with the second year of probation, the full 

year of probation monitoring costs shall be paid to the CTC on or before January 31st 

28 

of each calendar year. The total probation monitoring costs for each calendar year may 

be adjusted by the CTC on an annual basis.

12.

Violation of Probation. The CTC shall retain jurisdiction over respondent’s 

case during the period of probation. If respondent violates any term or condition of 

this Order, after giving his written notice and an opportunity to be heard on the issue 

of his violation of probation, the CTC may set aside the stay order and impose the 

suspension of respondent’s credential. If an accusation or petition to revoke probation 

is filed against respondent during probation, the probation period shall automatically 

be extended until a final decision is made on the accusation or petition.

13.

Completion of Probation. Upon successful completion of the terms of 

this probation, respondent’s credentials and certificates shall be fully restored.

DATE: November 28, 2022

JAMI A. TEAGLE-BURGOS

Administrative Law Judge

Office of Administrative Hearings

29

