BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Accusation Against: 

LA SHAWN DENISE WITT, 

Clear Single Subject Teaching Credential 

Clear Administrative Services Credential 

Certificate of Eligibility Administrative Services Credential, 

Respondent. 

Agency Case No. 1-579743512 

OAH No. 2022030610 

PROPOSED DECISION

Administrative Law Judge Deena R. Ghaly, Office of Administrative Hearings 

(OAH), State of California, heard this matter on October 3 and 4, 2022, by 

videoconference. 

Deputy Attorney General William D. Gardner represented Complainant Mary 

Vixie Sandy, Ed.D. acting in her official capacity as Executive Director of the California 

Commission on teacher Credentialing (Commission). Attorney Josh Adams represented 

Respondent La Shawn Denise Witt, who was present throughout the hearing. 

Documentary evidence and testimony were received, and argument was heard. 

The record was closed, and the matter was submitted for decision on October 4, 2022. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Background and Jurisdictional Matters 

1. 

On June 30, 2008, the Commission issued a Clear Single Subject Teaching 

Credential to Respondent. The Clear Single Subject Teaching Credential was in effect 

during times relevant to the instant matter and will expire on July 1, 2023.

2. 

On August 12, 2011, the Commission issued a Clear Administrative

Services Credential to Respondent. The Clear Administrative Services Credential was in 

effect during times relevant to the instant matter and will expire on July 1, 2023.

3. 

On June 1, 2009, the Commission issued a Certificate of Eligibility 

Administrative Services Credential to Respondent. The Certificate of Eligibility 

Administrative Service Credential was in effect during times relevant to the instant 

matter and does not expire.

4.

Respondent previously held the following certification documents:

(a) Preliminary Administrative Services Credential issued on 

June 1, 2011, and expired on July 1, 2013;

///

2

 
(b) Preliminary Single Subject Teaching Credential issued on 

February 1, 2007 and expired on March 1, 2012;

(c) Certificate of Clearance issued on December 5, 2006 and 

expired on January 1, 2016;

(d) Intern Single Subject Teaching Credential issued on 

November 1, 2006 and expired on December 1, 2008; 

(e) Short-Term Staff Permit issued on August 1, 2006 and 

expired on July 1, 2007;

(f) Emergency Long Term Single Subject Teaching Permit 

issued on January 5, 2005, and expired on December 1, 

2008;

(g) Pre-Intern Certificate issued on November 19, 2003, and 

expired on December 1, 2004; and 

(h) Emergency Long Term Single Subject Teaching Permit 

issued on September 22, 2003, and expired on October 1, 

2004. 

5. 

In a letter dated March 26, 2021, the Committee’s Commission of 

Credentials informed Respondent that it had determined there was probable cause to 

revoke her teaching credentials and other certification document. The Committee 

based its decision on Respondent’s criminal conduct occurring between 2015 and 

2017 entailing filing false insurance claims, which resulted in a misdemeanor 

conviction in 2019. The Committee’s decision was also based on misrepresentations 

3

 
Respondent made to the Commission regarding her criminal history in the course of 

renewing her credentials.

6.

Respondent timely filed a notice requesting an administrative hearing 

challenging the findings and decision. This matter then ensued.

Respondent’s Crime

7. 

On February 14, 2019, in the California Superior Court, Los Angeles 

County, Respondent pled nolo contendere and was convicted of violating Penal Code 

section 550, subdivision (b)(1) (presenting a false claim), a misdemeanor. The court 

sentenced Respondent to perform 300 hours of community service and to pay $30,700 

in restitution to the victim, as well as court fines and fees in amounts not established 

by the record. Respondent fulfilled the terms of her sentence, and, on September 18, 

2020, the court dismissed Respondent’s criminal conviction pursuant to Penal Code 

section 1203.4. 

8. 

The facts and circumstances leading to Respondent’s criminal conviction 

were that Respondent collected more than $30,000 in false claims and, in the process, 

forged colleagues’ signatures on the false claims.

Respondent’s False Statements on Re-Credentialing Application 

9. 

On April 5, 2018, Respondent submitted to the Commission a renewal 

application for her credentials. A question in the application asked whether criminal 

charges were pending against the applicant. Respondent falsely stated under penalty 

of perjury no criminal charges were pending against her even though, at the time, she 

had nine felony charges pending stemming from the fraudulent insurance claims she 

had submitted. 

4

 
Additional Evidence About Respondent’s Misconduct

10. Maria Armero is one of the individuals whose signature Respondent 

forged on the insurance claim form. Ms. Armero is an IUSD employee of more than 27 

years. During the period relevant to this matter, Ms. Armero worked with Respondent 

at an IUSD school, Monroe Middle School (MMS). Respondent administered 

standardized testing to MMS students and also was the faculty member responsible 

for several extracurricular activities such as student government and the annual prom 

dance. Ms. Armero assisted Respondent with these programs. Ms. Amero was never 

assigned any duties related to Human Resources functions and would not have had 

the authority or responsibility to sign claim forms related to disability claims.

11.  Ms. Armero learned about Respondent’s forgery when she was contacted 

by the insurance company’s investigator inquiring about the forms. Ms. Armero 

confirmed to the investigator that the signature in question was not hers. During the 

same period, Ms. Armero recalled she received messages from Respondent but did not 

respond to them.

12.

Arlae Chio is the other individual whose signature Respondent forged. At 

the time, she too was employed at MMS and assisted Respondent with her duties. 

Although she later worked for MMS’s payroll department, at the time relevant to the 

charges against Respondent, she had no duties related to personnel matters, including 

signing employees’ disability claims.

13.  Ms. Chio was also interviewed by the insurance company’s investigator. 

When she was shown claim forms with her purported signature, Ms. Chio not only 

confirmed the signature was not her own but determined the phone number and title 

attributed to her were also incorrect. During the period Ms. Chio was being 

5

 
interviewed by the insurance investigator, she received texts from Respondent. As she 

recalled them, the texts stated “Hi, how are you? I signed your name” or words to that 

effect. Ms. Chio suspected Respondent was trying to relay that Ms. Chio had agreed to 

Respondent signing her name on the insurance claim forms. Ms. Chio did not respond 

to the texts.

14.  Ms. Chio suffered mental trauma as the result of the events stemming 

from Respondent’s forgery. Several years before, she had been the victim of identity 

theft and the resulting ramifications continue to impact her financial affairs and her 

emotional well-being. Discovering that, once again, her name had been used without 

her permission caused her anxiety and the return of painful memories.

15.  Ms. Chio discovered that sometime during the investigation, Respondent 

entered Ms. Chio’s office while Ms. Chio was away from campus. Ms. Chio contacted 

school management who installed a lock requiring a code to enter the area housing 

Ms. Chio’s workstation. 

Respondent’s Evidence 

RESPONDENT’S TESTIMONY 

16. 

Respondent holds a doctorate in education and two undergraduate 

degrees, in biology and African studies, respectively. She also holds various 

certifications in special education and psychology. 

17. 

Respondent resigned from IUSD after a senior administrator told her she 

was being investigated for insurance fraud. At IUSD, she served in multiple 

administrative and teaching roles. After leaving there, Respondent worked briefly for 

the Capistrano School District and then, since 2017, Respondent has been employed 

6

 
by the Los Angeles Unified School District (LAUSD). She is currently assigned to 

Hawkins High School as a teacher on special assignment. Her duties include acting as 

the coordinator of the school’s Intervention Prevention Support program which 

provides resources for troubled students and their teachers. Before joining Hawkins 

High School, Respondent served in several other administrative and teaching roles at 

various LAUSD schools. Respondent also runs a private tutoring business and works as 

an event planner.

18. 

In addition to her work in and out of LAUSD, Respondent maintained she 

founded and runs a non-profit organization, My Sister’s Keeper, to assist homeless 

women and women recently released from prison rebuild their lives. She further 

maintained she is an active participant in several other community organizations and 

estimated she devotes 10 to 15 hours per week to philanthropy. 

19. 

Regarding her criminal history, Respondent maintained she was under 

severe personal pressure stemming from a slew of problems during the time she 

engaged in the conduct leading to her criminal convictions. According to Respondent, 

from about 2012 to 2017, she was addicted crack cocaine, the victim of two abusive 

romantic relationships, attempted to commit suicide on three occasions, endured a 

rape, and had to file for bankruptcy. She needed money for many things, including her 

own psychological therapy, her daughter’s school fees, her own schooling, and to give 

to a boyfriend. 

20. 

Respondent expressed remorse and regret regarding her criminal 

conduct in filing the false insurance claims. She denied forging signatures on the claim 

forms, stating she “told” the individuals whose names she used that she would be 

signing for them and that signing for each other was a common practice among 

employees at MMS. 

7

 
21.

Regarding Respondent’s false statements about the then-pending 

criminal charges on her credential renewal application, Respondent maintained she did 

not disclose them because she believed the Commission was already aware of the 

charges and was unsure of the exact status of the criminal proceeding. 

CHARACTER EVIDENCE

22. 

LaTanya KirkCarter, Respondent’s former colleague at Inglewood, 

testified as a character witness for Respondent. Ms. KirkCarter stated she worked with 

Respondent for approximately a year and a half during the 2012-2013 school year. Ms. 

KirkCarter left Inglewood to join the Beverly Hills School District as a cabinet-level 

administrator.

23.  Ms. KirkCarter recalled Respondent to be an exceptionally qualified and 

skilled educator and communicator who was able to succeed in challenging 

educational environments where others could not. Ms. KirkCarter is aware of 

Respondent’s misconduct and stated she understood how serious and concerning they 

were; however, she noted the Commission was not always consistent about meting out 

discipline and had allowed administrators and educators with more serious charges to 

continue in their careers. Ms. KirkCarter also stated that, while not an excuse, 

Inglewood during the period Respondent committed the misconduct leading to her 

criminal conviction, was “seeped” in corruption and the generally depressed standards 

of ethics touched the entire school community.

24.

Franklin Brent Tilley has served as a principal at various schools within 

IUSD, including MMS. He was Respondent’s supervisor from 2007 until 2015. Principal 

Tilley is very familiar with Respondent’s criminal conviction and the underlying 

misconduct. Despite this knowledge, as he testified at the hearing and consistent with 

8

 
a letter he wrote on her behalf, he believes in Respondent’s value as an educator and 

ultimate integrity, noting that, while at MMS, her duties allowed her access to school 

funds and multiple audits of her work found she used the funds appropriately. 

Additionally, Principal Tilley stated Respondent’s ability to connect with the students, 

including the most difficult and at-risk among them, to be exceptional and rare. 

Analysis 

25. 

Respondent was vague and general about the issues giving rise to her 

criminal conduct and gave no specifics about whether she is now sober and if so, what 

steps she takes to maintain her sobriety. Respondent did not provide any 

corroborating evidence supporting her contentions she suffered extreme personal 

setbacks and challenges. Further, Respondent did not provide any corroborating 

evidence supporting the philanthropic work, including founding the non-profit 

organization, My Sister’s Keeper.

26. 

Respondent’s explanation for her misstatements on her re-credentialing 

documents is nonsensical and not credited. It also indicates that, as late as April of 

2018, Respondent continued to engage in dishonest behavior.

27. Ms. KirkCarter and Principal Tilley presented as candid and forthright. 

Their evidence is credited to the extent it established Respondent to possess certain

skills valuable to, and perhaps rare in educators, particularly with respect to 

communication and ability to relate to students. The evidence they provided, however,

did not help establish that Respondent’s character and ethics meet the required

standards for continued licensure, as addressed in the Legal Conclusions below.

/// 

9

 
LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

Legal Standards 

1.

Education Code section 44421 authorizes the Commission to discipline

the credential of a teacher “for immoral or unprofessional conduct . . . or for any cause 

that would have warranted the denial of an application for a credential or the renewal 

thereof, or for evident unfitness for service.” One cause that may warrant the denial of 

an application is if the applicant “(e) [h]as committed any act involving moral 

turpitude” if that conduct “related to the applicant’s fitness to teach or fitness to 

perform other duties for which that applicant is certificated, or competence to perform 

the duties which the credential would authorize the applicant to perform. (Ed. Code, § 

44345.) 

2. 

Complainant bears the burden of proving the alleged grounds for 

discipline by clear and convincing evidence to a reasonable certainty. (

(1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035, 1039.) Clear and 

convincing evidence “requires a finding of high probability,” and has been described 

as “requiring that the evidence be ‘“so clear as to leave no substantial doubt”; 

“sufficiently strong to command the unhesitating assent of every reasonable 

mind.” [Citation.]” (

. (1981) 28 Cal.3d 908, 919.) 

Causes for Discipline 

3. 

Complainant alleged Respondent’s misconduct constituted 

unprofessional conduct and is therefore cause for discipline. “Unprofessional conduct” 

is “‘that which violates the rules or ethical code of a profession or such conduct which 

is unbecoming a member of a profession in good standing.’” (

10

 
(1953) 41 Cal.2d 546, 553 [overruled on other grounds in 

 (1972) 6 Cal.3d 575, 587, fn. 7.]) 

Clear and convincing evidence established Respondent’s misconduct as set out 

in Factual Findings 7 through 9, constitutes unprofessional conduct. Respondent 

engaged in a pattern of dishonest, criminal behavior and attempted to conceal it when 

renewing her credentials. Such behavior is not consistent with the standards of 

integrity, honesty and good judgment expected of a licensed professional. 

4. 

Complainant alleged Respondent’s misconduct constituted moral 

turpitude and is therefore cause for discipline. Moral turpitude is “crime or misconduct 

committed without excuse, or any ‘dishonest or immoral’ act not necessarily a 

crime. [Citation.]” (

1027; see also 

(1990) 224 Cal.App. 3d 1016, 

(2018) 31 Cal.App. 5th 262, 

281; and 

(1979) 98 Cal. App. 3d 167, 185.) 

Clear and convincing evidence established Respondent’s misconduct 

constituted moral turpitude. Lying on insurance claims and re-credentialing 

applications and forging signatures constitute dishonest and immoral acts.

Respondent’s proffered evidence of extenuating circumstances was not entirely 

convincing but even if true, cannot excuse her fraudulent conduct. Respondent is an 

educated and clearly resourceful individual who has accomplished much both in terms 

of education and professional accomplishments. Her circumstances do not justify 

turning to fraud and deception to resolve her difficulties.

5.

Complainant alleged Respondent’s misconduct constituted immoral 

conduct and is therefore cause for discipline. Immoral conduct is that which is

“inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, 

11

 
dissoluteness; or as willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral indifference 

to the opinions of respectable members of the community, and as an inconsiderate 

attitude toward good order and the public welfare. [Citation.]” (

(1951) 36 Cal.2d 734, 740, see also 

 (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811 [A teacher’s 

falsification of attendance records to add names to secure continued employment is 

immoral conduct for purposes of teacher certification.]) 

Clear and convincing evidence established Respondent’s misconduct 

constituted immoral conduct, not just in her crime and failure to accurately report it in 

the re-certification application but in her flagrant disregard for the consequences to 

the individuals whose names she forged in completing the application, including the 

possibility they may be implicated in her wrongdoing and their discomfort of being 

drawn into its investigation. 

6. 

For purposes of teacher discipline, conduct cannot be characterized as 

unprofessional, involving moral turpitude, or immoral unless it indicates a teacher is 

unfit to teach. (

 (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 229.) In 

, the court set out criteria to analyze whether alleged misconduct establishes 

unfitness to teach. The criteria have been codified at California Code of Regulations, 

title 5, section 80302 and are listed and applied to the instant matter as follows: 

a. 

The likelihood that the conduct may have adversely affected students, fellow 

teachers, or the educational community, and the degree of such adversity 

anticipated. Respondent’s conduct had an adverse effect on MMS’s educational 

community. As noted above, her colleagues were troubled and disturbed by the 

knowledge their names had been used and by the investigation. School resources of 

12

 
the school were used to improve security after she made an unauthorized visit to Ms. 

Choi’s office. The degree of the adverse effect is deemed moderately.

b. 

The proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct. The events in question 

occurred between 2015 and 2018.

c. 

The type of credential held or applied for by the person involved. Respondent’s 

credentials allow her to teach and participate in special programs for young, 

suggestible students for whom she must serve as an appropriate role model. 

d. 

The extenuating or aggravating circumstances surrounding the conduct.

Respondent introduced some evidence of difficult personal problems to establish 

extenuating services; however, her explanations were vague and unpersuasive. 

Aggravating circumstances include that Respondent’s misconduct involved multiple 

acts of dishonesty and deception over several years and continued even after her 

criminal prosecution began, her actions implicated innocent colleagues, and, to the 

present, she has not taken full responsibility for all her misconduct.

e.

The praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the 

conduct. Respondent’s misconduct can only be described as blameworthy.

f. 

The likelihood of the recurrence of the questioned conduct. Life problems for 

anyone, including Respondent, are likely to crop up on a continuing basis. Without a 

clear sense of accountability for past wrongdoing, the likelihood she will resort to 

similar misconduct in the future is high.

g. 

The extent to which disciplinary action may inflict an adverse impact or chilling 

effect upon the constitutional rights of the person involved, or other certified persons.

Respondent’s misconduct does not implicate any constitutional rights. 

13

h.

The publicity or notoriety given to the conduct. There was no evidence of 

publicity or notoriety arising from Respondent’s misconduct or the resulting 

consequences. 

7. 

Complainant also alleges evident unfitness for service as cause to 

discipline Respondent’s credentials. Evident unfitness for service properly means 

“clearly not fit, not adapted to or unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of 

temperamental defects or inadequacies. [Fn. omitted.]” (

 (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 

1444 (

This cause for discipline connotes a “fixed character trait, 

presumably not remediable merely on receipt of notice that one’s conduct fails to 

meet the expectations of the employing school district.” On this cause for discipline, 

the 

factors “must be analyzed to determine, as a threshold matter, whether 

the cited conduct indicates unfitness for service. [Citation.]  If they indicate unfitness to 

teach, the next step is to determine whether the ‘unfitness’ is ‘evident’; i.e., whether the 

offensive conduct is caused by a defect in temperament. (

, supra, 2 

Cal.App.4th at 1445.)

As set out in Legal Conclusion 6, applying the 

 factors in the instant 

case demonstrates multiple areas indicative of Respondent’s unfitness to teach, 

including a propensity of dishonesty even in the wake of a criminal prosecution, a 

failure to accept responsibility for at least some of her misconduct, and a failure to 

demonstrate self-awareness. These factors directly implicate Respondent’s character, 

including a propensity to resolve life difficulties through criminal and dishonest 

behavior. As such, they are deemed temperamental defects and therefore, constitute 

evident unfitness for service. 

/// 

14

8.

Considering the record of evidence as a whole, Respondent’s misconduct 

warrants revocation of all of her credentials, certificates, and authorizations. Educators 

play an important role in their students’ development and serve as role models,

sometimes among the most significant role models, in their students’ 

lives. Respondent’s fitness to teach must therefore include the character and values 

she brings to the job because they will ultimately be communicated to the students 

and will inform their education. (See 

(1991) 53 

Cal. 3d 863, 899.) Whatever other professional attributes Respondent possesses, 

character the evidence presented established she does not currently possess the 

integrity and high ethical values required for her profession.

ORDER 

The credentials, certificates, and authorizations issued to Respondent by the 

Commission on Teacher Credentials are revoked.

DATE:  

DEENA R. GHALY

Administrative Law Judge

Office of Administrative Hearings

15

