BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the First Amended Petition to Revoke 

Probation Against: 

JENNIFER G. MANOR GRAY, Respondent. 

Agency Case No. 1-879785470 

OAH No. 2022100635 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Administrative Law Judge Holly M. Baldwin, State of California, Office of 

Administrative Hearings, heard this matter on January 18, 2023, by videoconference. 

Deputy Attorney General Christopher M. Young represented complainant Mary 

Vixie Sandy, Ed.D., Executive Director of the California Commission on Teacher 

Credentialing. 

Respondent Jennifer G. Manor Gray represented herself. 

The record closed and the matter was submitted for decision on January 18, 

2023. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Procedural History and Probation Conditions 

1. 

Respondent Jennifer G. Manor Gray holds the following certification 

documents (credentials) issued by the California Commission on Teacher Credentialing 

(Commission): a Clear Multiple Subject Teaching Credential with General Subjects and 

English authorization, originally issued on February 10, 1993; a Clear Crosscultural, 

Language, and Academic Development Certificate, originally issued on February 27, 

1995; and an Administrative Services Credential Certificate of Eligibility, originally 

issued on August 1, 2000. 

2. 

An accusation was filed against respondent on October 31, 2019, alleging 

causes for discipline for unprofessional conduct, immoral conduct, addiction to the use 

of intoxicating beverages to excess, and an act of moral turpitude. Respondent had 

been working as a first-grade teacher. On November 27, 2017, on school premises 

during school hours and while respondent’s students were present, the school 

principal noticed that respondent smelled strongly of alcohol. Respondent was 

removed from the classroom and police were called. A breath sample showed that her 

blood alcohol content was 0.30 percent, and she was arrested for being drunk in 

public. 

3. 

Respondent signed a stipulated settlement in which she admitted the 

truth of all allegations and charges in the accusation. The Commission issued a 

decision and order effective October 16, 2020, in which respondent’s credentials were 

revoked, the revocations were stayed, and respondent was placed on probation for a 

period of five years. Her conditions of probation include requirements to abstain 

completely from possession, consumption, or use of alcohol, cannabis, and controlled 

2 

substances (Condition 9); and to submit to bodily fluid testing for alcohol, cannabis, 

and controlled substances at the request of her probation monitor (Condition 10). 

Condition 2 requires compliance with all terms of probation. Condition 14 provides 

that if respondent violates any term or condition of probation, the Commission may 

refer the matter for filing of a petition to revoke probation, and after giving 

respondent notice and an opportunity to be heard, may set aside the stay order and 

impose the stayed discipline. 

4. 

On August 5, 2022, complainant Mary Vixie Sandy, Ed.D., Executive 

Director of the Commission, issued a first amended petition to revoke probation. 

Complainant alleges that respondent has violated her probation by failing to abstain 

from alcohol, as evidenced by a positive alcohol test, and failing to submit to testing 

on four occasions. 

5. 

Respondent filed a notice of defense, and this hearing followed. 

Violations of Alcohol Abstinence and Testing Requirements 

6. 

Stephanie Giannini, special investigator for the Commission, is 

respondent’s probation monitor. As part of her monitoring duties, Giannini randomly 

contacts respondent to request that she submit a testing sample (which respondent 

must submit on the day it is requested), and receives the test results from the lab. 

Giannini testified credibly at hearing. 

7. 

On September 15, 2021, Giannini called and emailed respondent, 

informing her that she was required to test that day. Respondent told Giannini that 

she could not get to the lab that day because she was the only person at her 

workplace, and she did not have her car. Giannini gave respondent permission to test 

the next day, September 16, 2021. 

3 

8. 

Respondent submitted a urine sample on September 16, 2021, which 

tested positive for alcohol metabolites. On October 15, 2021, Giannini sent respondent 

a notice of probation violation and informed her that the matter would be referred for 

filing of a petition to revoke probation. 

9. 

Giannini attempted to contact respondent by telephone on the morning 

of December 1, 2021, to inform her that she was required to test that day. 

Respondent’s voicemail box was full, so Giannini could not leave a voicemail message. 

Giannini followed up by sending an email to respondent. Respondent failed to test on 

December 1, 2021. 

10.  On December 3, 2021, respondent emailed Giannini, saying that her 

internet had been out of service for two days and she had just seen Giannini’s 

December 1 email. Respondent said she was unable to drive due to a broken foot and 

that she had nobody available to give her a ride. She also stated, “I’m not working so 

paying for the test is a challenge.” Giannini responded by email, telling respondent 

that moving forward she must test on the date requested. Respondent agreed. 

11.  On December 16, 2021, Giannini called respondent, informing her that 

she was required to test that day. Respondent told Giannini that she could not test 

that day because she was at Kaiser, had medical appointments, and was not released 

to drive. Giannini told respondent that she needed to test that day, and suggested that 

respondent ask the person who gave her a ride to Kaiser to take her to the lab, or 

arrange for a ride via Uber or Lyft. Respondent failed to test on December 16, 2021. 

12.  On December 22, 2021, Giannini sent respondent a notice of probation 

violation and informed her that the matter would be referred for filing of a petition to 

revoke probation. 

4 

13.  On the morning of May 13, 2022, Giannini contacted respondent by 

voicemail and email, informing her that she was required to test that day. Respondent 

responded to Giannini via text message in the late afternoon, writing: “I was away from 

my phone and computer today and missed your message and your email. My 

apologies.” Respondent failed to test on May 13, 2022. 

14.  On the morning of May 23, 2022, Giannini contacted respondent by 

voicemail and email, informing her that she was required to test that day. Respondent 

replied by email saying that she could not test that day because she was home sick 

and running a fever. Respondent failed to test on May 23, 2022. 

Respondent’s Additional Evidence 

15. 

Respondent testified that she has the disease of alcoholism, and that she 

has “tried really hard” to stay sober and comply with her probation. 

16. 

Respondent reports that she attends an Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) 

meeting every day at 6:00 a.m. via Zoom, and meets with her sponsor every two weeks. 

Respondent also attends online meetings for women in recovery. 

17. 

Respondent did not dispute her positive alcohol test of September 16, 

2021. However, she offered no explanation or information about the circumstances or 

length of a relapse, or steps taken to address it. 

18. 

In her testimony, respondent reported that she had 225 days of sobriety 

as of the date of the hearing, implying a sobriety date of June 7, 2022. However, when 

later asked what her sobriety date is, she stated it was November 5, 2019. When asked 

to explain how a positive alcohol test in September 2021 was consistent with a 

sobriety date in November 2019, respondent did not do so. Respondent simply stated, 

5 

after a long pause, that it was “a negative choice” to not deal with life in a positive 

way. Respondent did not offer any evidence regarding her alcoholism recovery efforts 

other than her own testimony. 

19. 

Respondent admitted failing to test on the four occasions alleged as 

probation violations (Factual Findings 9-11 and 13-14), as well as on September 15, 

2021, the date that Giannini had excused (Factual Finding 7). Respondent stated that 

“life got in the way.” As a partial explanation, respondent stated that she worked as a 

porter at a car dealership from December 2020 to December 2021. She stated she was 

the only person at the worksite—this testimony is not entirely plausible. Respondent 

also stated that nobody at her workplace knew that she was required to submit to 

random testing, which is more suggestive of a motive to not request time off from 

work than of a lack of other staff to cover her duties. 

20. 

Respondent is currently taking online courses to become a certified 

aromatherapist and life coach. She is also acting as a caregiver for her friend’s elderly 

mother and helping to care for her own parents. 

21. 

Respondent stated she “possibly” may seek to use her teaching 

credential in the future if she is allowed to complete probation. Respondent explained 

that she worked hard to obtain her credentials, including getting a master’s degree in 

curriculum and instruction, and that she worked hard as an educator. 

22. 

Respondent wants a chance to re-start her probation period and comply 

with her probation requirements. 

/// 

/// 

6 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Under Education Code section 44000 et seq., and California Code of 

Regulations, title 5, section 80000 et seq., the Commission is responsible for 

credentialing teachers in public schools in California, including issuing credentials and 

taking adverse action against applicants and credential holders. “Adverse action” 

includes the suspension or revocation of a credential. (Ed. Code, § 44000.5, Cal. Code 

Regs., tit. 5, § 80300, subd. (a).) 

2. 

Complainant bears the burden of proving cause to revoke probation, by 

a preponderance of the evidence. (Sandarg v. Dental Bd. of California (2010) 184 

Cal.App.4th 1434, 1441.) 

3. 

Condition 14 of respondent’s probation provides that if respondent 

violates any probationary term, after notice and opportunity to be heard, the 

Commission may set aside the stay order and impose the stayed discipline of 

revocation. 

4. 

Respondent violated Condition 9 of her probation by failing to abstain 

from alcohol, as evidenced by a positive test for alcohol metabolites, which she does 

not contest. (Factual Findings 8 and 17.) Cause for revocation of probation has been 

established on this basis. 

5. 

Respondent violated Condition 10 of her probation by failing to submit 

to biological fluid testing on four occasions. (Factual Findings 9-11 and 13-14.) Cause 

for revocation of probation has been established on this basis. 

6. 

Respondent seeks to extend her probation period so that she can 

demonstrate compliance with her probation conditions. However, her record on 

7 

probation does not demonstrate a commitment to compliance with the testing 

requirement. Nor did respondent explain how she would be able to ensure in the 

future that the pressures of daily life do not interfere with testing as required. More 

troubling is respondent’s failure to explain her positive alcohol test and her conflicting 

and confusing testimony regarding the current length of her sobriety, which reflect a 

failure to accept responsibility and suggest a lack of candor. 

Given these circumstances, public protection requires revocation of 

respondent’s credentials. 

ORDER 

The petition to revoke probation is granted. The stay of revocation is lifted and 

all credentials, certificates, and authorizations issued to respondent Jennifer G. Manor 

Gray are revoked. 

DATE: 

HOLLY M. BALDWIN 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings 

8 

02/15/2023 
 
 
