BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Accusation Against: 

DAVID WARD KECK, Respondent. 

Agency Case No. 2-50886402 

OAH No. 2022020078 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Administrative Law Judge Holly M. Baldwin, State of California, Office of 

Administrative Hearings, heard this matter on July 18, 2022, by videoconference.

Deputy Attorney General Timothy J. McDonough represented complainant Mary 

Vixie Sandy, Ed.D., Executive Director of the California Commission on Teacher 

Credentialing.

Attorney Lucy S. McAllister represented respondent David Ward Keck, who was 

present.

The record closed and the matter was submitted for decision on July 18, 2022.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

1.

Respondent David Ward Keck holds a Clear Single Subject Teaching 

Credential in the subject “Foreign Language: Spanish” issued by the California 

Commission on Teacher Credentialing (Commission). The credential was initially issued 

on May 31, 1995, was in full force and effect at all relevant times, and is renewed 

through March 1, 2027. Respondent also holds a Clear Certificate of Completion of 

Staff Development issued by the Commission on September 22, 2006, which was in full 

force and effect at all relevant times, and does not expire. There is no history of 

adverse action against respondent’s credentials. 

Respondent also previously held the following certifications: Preliminary Single 

Subject Teaching Credential; Designated Subjects Adult Education Teaching Credential: 

Full-Time; Certificate of Clearance; Single Subject Teaching Permit; 30-Day Substitute 

Teaching Permit; and 30-Day Substitute Teaching Credential.

2. 

At its meeting on December 16-18, 2020, the Commission’s Committee 

of Credentials (Committee) found probable cause to recommend adverse action 

against respondent’s credential. Respondent requested an administrative hearing. 

3. 

On October 28, 2021, complainant Mary Vixie Sandy, Ed.D., issued an 

accusation against respondent in her official capacity as Executive Director of the 

Commission. Complainant seeks to impose discipline on respondent’s credential based 

on an incident of domestic violence by respondent against his wife, for which he 

received a misdemeanor conviction. Respondent filed a notice of defense; this hearing 

followed. 

2

Incident on July 3, 2019, and Criminal Conviction

4.

On July 3, 2019, at about 11:19 p.m., police officers responded to a call 

reporting a domestic violence incident at the home of respondent and his wife, T.K. 

(Respondent’s wife and child are referred to by initials in this decision to protect their 

privacy.) The 911 call was placed by their 12-year-old child, C.K. Respondent and his 

wife had argued because respondent wanted C.K. to finish a reading assignment and 

T.K. wanted C.K. to go to bed. During the course of the argument, respondent hit his 

wife in the face and she fell down. When officers arrived, they observed that T.K. had a 

cut lip, loose tooth, and bruised nose. In his statement to police, respondent denied or 

minimized his conduct, stating that when his wife was using hand gestures during their 

argument, he “may have” accidentally pushed her hand into her face. 

5. 

On November 26, 2019, respondent was convicted in the Superior Court 

of California, County of Santa Clara, upon a plea of no contest, of a misdemeanor 

violation of Penal Code section 273.5, subdivision (a) (inflicting corporal injury on a 

spouse). Imposition of sentence was suspended and respondent was placed on formal 

probation for three years, on terms and conditions that included serving 120 days in 

custody with a recommendation for a weekend work program, completing 20 hours of 

volunteer work, completing a 52-week domestic violence program, and paying fines 

and fees.

6. 

Respondent was granted early termination of probation on June 1, 2021. 

On July 27, 2021, the court granted respondent’s motion for dismissal pursuant to 

Penal Code section 1203.4 (sometimes referred to as “expungement”).

3

Respondent’s Evidence

THE INCIDENT ON JULY 3, 2019

7.

Respondent and his wife T.K. both testified at hearing. Their testimony 

regarding the July 3, 2019 incident was consistent and credible.

In contrast to his attitude at the time of the offense, respondent now accepts 

full responsibility for hitting his wife in the face. He expressed remorse and an 

understanding of the wrongfulness of his conduct. 

T.K. described the altercation, stating that while she and respondent were 

arguing, she was in front of him and waving her hands. Respondent put his finger on 

her chin twice while arguing with her, and she said that if he did it again, she would 

bite his finger. Respondent touched her chin again, and T.K. bit his finger. Respondent 

hit T.K. in the face and she fell down. T.K. explained that it was “quite shocking” that 

respondent raised his hand to her, because he had never done so before. Respondent 

and T.K. have now been married for 21 years. 

Respondent and T.K. have both apologized to their child for this incident, and 

have explained that C.K. was right to call 911. Respondent has talked with C.K. to make 

sure that his child knows the incident was respondent’s fault.

8. 

The police made a mandatory report to Child Protective Services (CPS) 

after the incident on July 3, 2019. A social worker separately interviewed T.K., C.K., and 

respondent. The social worker made a finding of “inconclusive” as to an allegation of 

emotional abuse of C.K. by respondent. The social worker encouraged respondent to 

attend anger management classes, and also encouraged the family to attend 

counseling. 

4

9.

The July 2019 police report stated that T.K. told police respondent had 

never hit her before, but he pushed her once years ago and put his hand on her throat. 

At hearing, T.K. disputed the police reporting of her statements to the officers and 

stated the prior incident was a confrontation in a hallway where respondent put his 

hand up to stop her. Documents reflect that in 2013, CPS investigated a prior 

allegation of emotional abuse toward C.K. and made a finding of “inconclusive.” 

Respondent and T.K. testified that the 2013 investigation was in response to a report 

from C.K.’s kindergarten teacher after C.K. drew a self-portrait between arguing 

parents. 

COMPLIANCE WITH CRIMINAL PROBATION

10. 

Respondent complied with all requirements of his probation and 

received early termination and dismissal, as set forth in Factual Finding 6.

11.

Prior to his conviction, respondent enrolled in a domestic violence 

program and completed 16 sessions through Pathway Society. After his conviction, the 

court gave him credit for these previous sessions toward his requirement to complete 

a 52-week program. Respondent then completed his remaining 36 sessions with the 

court-ordered provider, A Better Choice @ WAVES.

12. While respondent was attending the domestic violence program at 

Pathway Society, he helped interpret for the Spanish speakers in the class. Respondent 

spoke with the program manager and volunteered to translate the curriculum 

materials into Spanish. He spent 40 hours on this task, and his probation officer found 

it met his court-ordered requirement to complete 20 volunteer hours.

13.

A report from A Better Choice @ WAVES to respondent’s probation 

officer dated September 24, 2020, confirmed that respondent had completed the 

5

remaining 36 sessions and complied with program expectations. The evaluator found 

that respondent had accepted some responsibility, but was still struggling with a 

tendency to focus on the other person’s behavior instead of his own emotions and 

behavior. 

INDIVIDUAL THERAPY

14. 

Respondent sought out individual counseling with Jerry Mermis, L.M.F.T. 

Mermis wrote a letter and testified at hearing. He has reviewed the accusation and 

police report. Mermis first evaluated respondent on February 8, 2022, and formulated 

a treatment plan. Mermis conducted 12 sessions of individual therapy with respondent 

between February and July 2022. The primary modality Mermis used in his work with 

respondent was Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT), which Mermis also refers as 

Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy. Respondent’s wife also attended one session and 

Mermis observed the couple’s interaction and dynamic. 

Mermis credibly testified that through these therapy sessions, respondent has 

gained insight into his emotions and behaviors, and has learned new tools to address 

conflict, improve communication, cope with stressors, and regulate his emotions. 

Respondent has accepted responsibility for his actions and has demonstrated an 

improved ability to control his emotions, with a positive impact on his family 

relationships. Mermis does not believe that respondent has an “anger problem.” It is

Mermis’s opinion that respondent is “well suited to go forward as a responsible and 

productive member of his profession, and of society, at large.”

CHANGES IN PERSONAL RELATIONSHIPS

15. 

Respondent explained that his therapy with Mermis had helped him 

understand what the instructors in the domestic violence program had been saying 

6

about his problems distinguishing between first-hand and second-hand emotions, and 

how his feelings of frustration and being disrespected turned into anger. Respondent 

reported that therapy has helped him understand himself and become a better 

husband, parent, and teacher. He has learned new strategies for addressing conflict, 

such as sitting down and listening carefully, then calmly responding.

16. 

Respondent and T.K. described how respondent used what he learned in 

the domestic violence classes and therapy to develop more positive relationships. 

Respondent reported his relationship with his child has “grown tremendously,” and 

that C.K. shared with him about issues related to the challenges of adolescence. T.K. 

confirmed that she and respondent have learned to communicate better, and she also 

reported that he is more compassionate with his students. C.K. submitted a declaration 

describing a close relationship with respondent, and the ongoing encouragement and 

support he provides. C.K. remembers the night of the domestic violence incident but 

has learned to forgive respondent. 

TEACHING EXPERIENCE AND CHANGES TO TEACHING METHODS

17. 

Respondent is employed by Campbell Union High School District, and 

has worked as a Spanish teacher at Leigh High School in San Jose since 1994. 

Respondent teaches Spanish 2 and 4, Advanced Placement (AP) Spanish Language and 

Culture, and AP Spanish Literature. He also works closely with the teacher of the 

Spanish class for native speakers. Respondent has been the chair of the school’s 

Modern Languages department for six years. 

18. 

Respondent designed and implemented the school’s first class in 

AP Spanish Literature seven years ago. His students get good AP scores, with passing 

7

scores above the statewide average, and many are very excited to get university 

credits. 

19. 

Respondent provided a copy of a positive performance evaluation for an 

observation of his online teaching in December 2020 by his principal. Respondent also 

provided a copy of an undated letter from his principal, Kara Butler, which he stated 

was written during the 2020-2021 school year. Butler described respondent as having 

creativity and a passion for teaching, an ability to connect with students, and as being 

organized and student-centered in his activities. He teaches multiple levels of Spanish, 

and has shifted his focus to projects that put students in real-life experiences to 

practice their Spanish. His students are engaged and actively participating.

20. 

Respondent has changed his teaching philosophy in response to the 

domestic violence incident and what he has learned in his classes and therapy. 

Respondent and T.K. (who is also a Spanish teacher, at a private high school) discussed 

how respondent had wanted his own child to do homework late at night, and they 

talked about the pressure of homework on them as parents. This incident, and the 

pivot to online teaching during the COVID-19 pandemic, caused respondent to 

reconsider the importance of homework. Respondent restructured his classes to assign 

less homework and to emphasize students conversing in Spanish during class time. He 

reports that this change has worked very well. Respondent also reports that he has 

learned to be more compassionate with students and less rigid about deadlines, and 

that he has used his improved communication skills to help defuse student-on-student 

conflicts at school. He stated he is now more focused on modeling appropriate 

responses for students in dealing with stressful situations. 

21. 

Respondent reported that the human resources department at the school 

district is aware of his conviction and the current accusation, but the principal and staff 

8

at Leigh High School are not. There was no evidence that respondent’s conviction is 

widely known in the community. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

The Commission is responsible for the credentialing of certificated 

personnel, including issuing credentials and taking adverse action against credential 

holders. (Ed. Code, § 44000 et seq.; Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80000 et seq.) The term 

“credential” includes a credential, certificate, life document, life diploma, permit, 

certificate of clearance, or waiver issued by the Commission. “Adverse action” includes 

suspension or revocation of credentials, private admonition, and public reproval. (Ed. 

Code, § 44000.5.)

2.

The burden of proof is on complainant to show cause for discipline by 

clear and convincing evidence. (See 

(1982) 135 Cal.App.3d 583, 855-856; Evid. Code, § 500.) 

3. 

Administrative proceedings regarding the discipline of professional 

licenses are intended not to punish the applicant or licensee, but to protect the public. 

(

(1998) 17 Cal.4th 763, 785-786.)

Causes for Discipline 

4. 

Education Code section 44421 authorizes the Commission to privately 

admonish, publicly reprove, suspend, or revoke the credential of a credential holder 

for “immoral or unprofessional conduct,” for “evident unfitness for service,” or for any 

cause that would warrant the denial of an application for a credential. Education Code 

section 44345, subdivision (e), authorizes the Commission to deny an application for a 

9

credential if the applicant has committed any act of moral turpitude. Complainant 

alleges four causes for discipline against respondent’s credentials: unprofessional 

conduct, evident unfitness for service, immoral conduct, and acts of moral turpitude. 

UNPROFESSIONAL CONDUCT

5.

“Unprofessional conduct” is conduct that “violates the rules or ethical 

code of a profession or such conduct which is unbecoming a member of a profession 

in good standing.” (

 (1953) 41 Cal.2d 546, 553 [citation 

omitted], overruled, in part, on another ground in 

(1972) 

6 Cal.3d 575, 588, fn. 7.) Respondent’s conduct of domestic violence and subsequent 

conviction, as set forth in Factual Findings 4 and 5, constitute unprofessional conduct. 

Cause for discipline exists under Education Code section 44421 on this ground.

EVIDENT UNFITNESS FOR SERVICE 

6. 

“Evident unfitness for service” means “clearly not fit, not adapted to or 

unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of temperamental defects or 

inadequacies.” (

(1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444.) The term “connotes a fixed character 

trait, presumably not remediable merely on receipt of notice that one’s conduct fails to 

meet the expectations of the employing school district.” (

) Respondent’s conduct 

should be evaluated in its totality. (

at p. 1457.) The evidence at hearing, as set forth 

in Factual Findings 4 through 16 and 20, established that respondent’s conduct was 

not by reason of a fixed character trait, and that respondent has grown and changed. 

Cause for discipline does not exist under Education Code section 44421 on the ground 

of evident unfitness for service. 

10 

IMMORAL CONDUCT

7.

Immoral conduct has been defined to mean that which is hostile to the 

welfare of the general public and contrary to good morals. It includes conduct 

showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the community, 

and conduct showing an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public 

welfare. (

(1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811 [citation 

omitted].) The definition of immoral or unprofessional conduct “must be considered in 

conjunction with the unique position of public school teachers, upon whom are 

imposed responsibilities and limitations on freedom of action which do not exist in 

regard to other callings.” (

 (2011) 194 Cal.App.4th 1454, 1466 [quotation marks and 

citation omitted].) Respondent’s conduct as set forth in Factual Findings 4 and 5 

constituted immoral conduct. Cause for discipline exists under Education Code section 

44421 on this ground.

MORAL TURPITUDE

8.

California appellate courts have held that a conviction for inflicting 

corporal injury on a spouse in violation of Penal Code section 273.5, subdivision (a), is 

a crime involving moral turpitude, due to the special relationship between perpetrator 

and victim. (

 (2015) 243 Cal.App.4th 129, 134-136.) Respondent’s 

conduct of domestic violence and subsequent conviction, as set forth in Factual 

Findings 4 and 5, reflected moral turpitude and constitutes cause for discipline under 

Education Code sections 44421 and 44345, subdivision (e). 

11 

Relationship of Misconduct to Fitness to Hold Credentials

9.

In accordance with 

(1969) 1 Cal.3d 

214 and California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80302,1 the Commission must

determine the relationship between the misconduct and the credential holder’s fitness, 

competence, or ability to perform the duties authorized by the credential. Factors to 

be considered (referred to as the “

 factors”) include, but are not limited to, 

the following: (1) likelihood that the conduct may have adversely affected students, 

fellow teachers, or the educational community, and the degree of such adversity 

anticipated; (2) proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct; (3) type of credential 

held; (4) extenuating or aggravating circumstances surrounding the conduct; 

(5) praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the conduct; 

(6) likelihood of recurrence of the conduct; (7) the extent to which disciplinary action 

may inflict an adverse impact or chilling effect upon the constitutional rights of the 

person involved or other certified persons; and (8) the publicity or notoriety given to 

the conduct. 

Only the most pertinent 

 factors need be considered in a particular 

case. (

(1993) 16 

Cal.App.4th 1766, 1777.) The factors may be applied to the charges in the aggregate, 

considering the totality of the teacher’s conduct. (

, 

, 2 Cal.App.4th at p. 1444.) 

1 All regulatory citations are to title 5 of the California Code of Regulations.

12 

 
10.

Upon a consideration of the pertinent 

factors, it is determined 

that respondent’s misconduct is related to his fitness, competence, and ability to 

discharge the duties authorized by his credentials. 

Respondent’s misconduct occurred relatively recently, three years ago. 

However, he complied with his criminal probation and has received early termination 

of probation and expungement. Respondent’s motives were blameworthy. There is no 

evidence that respondent’s misconduct resulted in publicity or notoriety. 

The governing regulations enumerate aggravating factors and mitigating 

factors to be considered in determining discipline. (§ 80300, subds. (b), (m).) 

“Aggravating factors” are circumstances demonstrating that a greater degree of 

adverse action is needed to adequately protect the public, schoolchildren, or the 

profession. These include: prior record of adverse action; multiple acts of wrongdoing 

or a pattern of misconduct; bad faith or dishonesty surrounding the conduct; 

significant harm to a student, the public, or the educational system; indifference 

toward the consequence of the misconduct; or prior warnings or reprimands for 

similar conduct. (§ 80300, subd. (b).) None of these factors apply to this case. Although 

the accusation alleges a pattern of domestic violence, the evidence at hearing 

established no such pattern. 

“Mitigating factors” are circumstances demonstrating that the public, 

schoolchildren, and the profession would be adequately protected by a more lenient 

degree of adverse action or no adverse action. These include, as relevant here: absence 

of a prior record of adverse action over many years of educational service, coupled 

with present misconduct which is not deemed most serious; and the nature and extent 

of subsequent rehabilitation. (§ 80300, subd. (m).) While respondent’s misconduct was 

13 

serious, it did not occur during the course of his teaching, and he has no record of 

prior adverse action over 28 years of teaching. More importantly, respondent has 

demonstrated significant rehabilitation since his offense. 

Respondent has demonstrated an important change in attitude since the time 

of the offense, and worked to understand his behavior and develop more appropriate 

responses and coping strategies. He has effectively employed these strategies in both 

his personal and professional life. He has not re-offended, despite the increased stress 

caused by the pandemic. Respondent’s misconduct is not deemed likely to recur.

Disposition 

11. 

As determined above, cause for discipline exists, and respondent’s 

misconduct is related to his fitness to hold credentials, such that adverse action may 

be taken against his credentials. The question is what degree of discipline is required 

for protection of the public, schoolchildren, and the profession. Education Code 

section 44421 provides statutory authority for the Commission to privately admonish, 

publicly reprove, suspend, or revoke a credential. Respondent’s misconduct was 

serious. However, he has provided sufficient evidence of rehabilitation and mitigation 

to show that revocation or suspension of his credentials is not necessary to protect the 

public. Upon consideration of the record as a whole, it is determined that a public 

reproval will be sufficient to ensure public protection.

14 

 
ORDER

All credentials issued to respondent David Ward Keck are hereby publicly 

reproved.

DATE:

HOLLY M. BALDWIN

Administrative Law Judge

Office of Administrative Hearings

15

