BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the First Amended Accusation Against: 

DARRYL GIDEON, 

Respondent. 

Clear Single Subject Teaching Credential, 

Agency Case No. 2-214931755 

OAH No. 2022090325 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) Chantal M. Sampogna, Office of Administrative 

Hearings, State of California, heard this matter by videoconference on May 1 through 

3, 2023. 

Deputy Attorney General Cristina A. Felix represented complainant Mary Vixie 

Sandy, Ed.D, Executive Director of the California Commission on Teacher Credentialing 

(Commission). 

Respondent Darryl Gideon appeared and represented himself. 

Testimony and documents were received in evidence. The record was closed 

and the matter was submitted for decision on May 3, 2023. 

The ALJ granted complainant’s unopposed motion for a protective order 

placing Exhibit Z2, the Confidential Names List, under seal to protect the privacy rights 

of the students named during the hearing. 

SUMMARY 

Complainant alleges that in May 2019, while working as a physical education 

(PE) teacher for the Compton Unified School District (District), respondent hit a 

seventh-grade student’s leg with a computer wrist rest, leaving visible marks on the 

student’s inner left knee and that such conduct constitutes unprofessional and 

immoral conduct and an act of moral turpitude, and demonstrates respondent’s 

evident unfitness to teach. Complainant further alleges aggravating factors, including 

that respondent’s conduct significantly harmed a child trusted to his care, and 

requests respondent’s 1998 and 2008 criminal convictions be considered when 

assessing discipline. Based on the foregoing, complainant requests all credentials, 

certificates, and authorizations issued to respondent be revoked. 

Respondent disputed some of the allegations and expressed remorse for his 

conduct. Respondent presented evidence in mitigation and of his rehabilitation in 

support of his continued credentialing, including his previous and subsequent work 

performance as a teacher. 

Complainant established by clear and convincing evidence cause to discipline 

respondent’s credential. However, protection of the public, schoolchildren, and the 

profession will be served if respondent’s credential is suspended for 120 days during 

which time respondent must complete 40 hours of study of child development. 

2 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Jurisdiction 

RESPONDENT’S CREDENTIALS 

1. 

On June 29, 2012, the Commission issued respondent a Clear Single 

Subject Teaching Credential (Teaching Credential) with an authorization in General 

Subjects. The Teaching Credential will expire on July 1, 2027, unless renewed. 

2. 

On November 7, 2019, respondent's credential was suspended pursuant 

to Education Code section 44424, subdivision (b), but was reinstated on February 19, 

2020. (Undesignated statutory references are to the Education Code.) 

3. 

Respondent previously held the following credentials, collectively 

“respondent’s credentials,” which were in full force and effect at all times relevant to 

the charges brought in the First Amended Accusation: 

a. Preliminary Full Time Designated Subjects Career Technical Education 

Teaching Credential issued August 31, 2010, which expired September 1, 

2015. 

b. Preliminary Full Time Designated Subjects Adult Education Teaching 

Credential issued August 31, 2010, which expired on September 1, 2015. 

c. Preliminary Single Subject Teaching Credential issued February 14, 

2011, which expired October 1, 2014. 

d. Preliminary Single Subject Teaching Credential issued September 14, 

2009, which expired October 1, 2014. 

3 

e. Emergency Long Term Single Subject Teaching Permit issued October 

4, 1999, which expired on August 1, 2000. 

f. Emergency Long Term Single Subject Teaching Permit issued July 27, 

1999, which expired on August 1, 2000. 

g. Emergency Long Term Single Subject Teaching Permit issued August 1, 

2000, which expired on August 1, 2001. 

h. Emergency Long Term Single Subject Teaching Permit issued August 1, 

2001, which expired on August 1, 2002. 

i. Emergency Long Term Single Subject Teaching Permit issued August 1, 

2002, which expired on August 1, 2003. 

j. Pre-Intern Certificate issued August 1, 2003, which expired September 

1, 2004, reissued September 1, 2004, and expired September 1, 2005. 

k. Emergency 30-day Substitute Teaching Permit issued October 1, 2009, 

which expired October 1, 2010. 

l. Emergency 30-day Substitute Teaching Permit issued October 1, 2008, 

which expired October 1, 2009. 

m. Emergency 30-day Substitute Teaching Permit issued October 1, 2007, 

which expired October 1, 2008. 

n. Emergency Long Term Single Subject Teaching Permit issued August 1, 

2000, which expired on August 1, 2001. 

/// 

4 

o. Emergency 30-day Substitute Teaching Permit issued September 15, 

2005, which expired October 1, 2006. 

PROCEDURAL HISTORY 

4. 

On May 28, 2019, the District placed respondent on administrative leave 

based on a substantiated report from a seventh-grade student that respondent hit him 

on the leg with a computer wrist rest, causing a bruise to his inner left knee. 

5. 

On September 9, 2019, the District sent respondent a Notice of Possible 

Dismissal/Immediate Suspension Without Pay and a Statement of Charges. 

6. 

On September 18, 2019, the District sent respondent a Notice of 

Dismissal/Immediate Suspension Without Pay and a Statement of Charges. 

7. 

On November 4, 2019, the District sent respondent an Amended Notice 

of Dismissal/Immediate Suspension Without Pay. 

8. 

On November 7, 2019, the Commission sent respondent a Notice of 

Mandatory Suspension suspending all of respondent’s credentials. 

9. 

On February 19, 2020, the Commission sent respondent a Notice of 

Credential Reinstatement, reinstating all of respondent’s credentials. 

10.  On December 6, 2020, respondent signed the “Separation Agreement 

Between [Respondent] and [District]” and resigned from the District, effective 

December 31, 2020; and the District withdrew its Notice Of Intent To Dismiss and its 

Statement of Charges. (Exh. 17.) 

11.  On January 13, 2021, the Commission received the District’s Notification 

of Respondent’s Change in Employment Status. 

5 

12. 

Between January and August 2021, the Commission investigated 

respondent’s conduct. Between August 18 and 20, 2021, the Committee of Credentials 

(Committee) determined probable cause existed within the meaning of California 

Regulations, title 5 (Regulations), section 80300, subdivision (o), for an adverse action 

against respondent. On August 27, 2021, the Committee notified respondent of its 

recommendation to revoke respondent’s credentials. 

13.  On September 25, 2021, respondent timely requested reconsideration of 

the Committee’s recommendation and an administrative hearing. 

14.  On October 29, 2021, the Committee denied respondent’s request for 

reconsideration based on its determination respondent failed to provide new and 

relevant information warranting reconsideration. 

15.  On June 16, 2022, complainant filed the Accusation. Respondent timely 

filed a Notice of Defense. On April 20, 2023, complainant filed the First Amended 

Accusation, the operative pleading in this matter. 

Evidentiary Ruling 

16. 

Complainant requested Exhibit 25, the Certified November 6, 2020 

Transcript of respondent’s deposition concerning the underlying District dismissal 

proceedings, be admitted into evidence. Respondent objected to the introduction of 

the transcript because he did not sign a verification as to the accuracy of the 

transcript. The objection was taken under submission. The ALJ overrules respondent’s 

objection, and the transcript is admitted into evidence. 

/// 

/// 

6 

Respondent’s Unprofessional Conduct 

17. 

In paragraph 15 of the Accusation, complainant alleged the following as 

the facts justifying cause for discipline: 

In May 2019, Respondent was a teacher of Physical 

Education (PE) at Charles [sic] Dickison Elementary School, 

Compton Unified School District. On May 23, 2019, at the 

end of PE class, Respondent was walking around the room. 

KL, a seventh grader, put his right foot on the leg of the 

table to tie his shoe and Respondent hit him on his leg near 

his knee, saying "Get your leg off of there." Other students 

were present and witnessed the incident. A photo was taken 

of KL's inner left knee and there appeared to be visible 

marks. 

(Exh. 1, p. A8.) (Though the Accusation names “Charles” Dickison Elementary school, 

the record established the name of the school is “Clarence A. Dickison Elementary 

School.”) 

DISTRICT INVESTIGATION 

18.  During the 2018-2019 school year, respondent was a PE teacher at 

Clarence A. Dickison Elementary School (Dickison), a kindergarten through eighth 

grade school. Respondent’s District teaching assignment that school year also 

included teaching PE at Longfellow Elementary School (Longfellow). On any given 

week respondent alternated his instruction at the schools, teaching two days per week 

at one school and three days per week at the other school. 

7 

19.  On May 23, 2019, respondent was assigned to teach at Dickison. On that 

day, rather than teaching a PE lesson, respondent taught his students a lesson on the 

stock market, a lesson he had taught and received praise for at Longfellow; 

respondent taught this lesson inside a classroom that use to be a computer room. At 

the beginning of class, respondent picked up a computer wrist rest, which had a hard, 

but rubber, backing, and was otherwise soft and filled with gel or some other 

comparable substance. During the lesson he walked around the room and used the 

wrist rest as a pointer, and sometimes tapped students on the shoulder, arm, or head 

with the wrist rest. Toward the end of the lesson, he walked by K.L. and saw K.L. had 

his left foot on the table portion of the desk he was sitting at and was tying his shoe. 

(Initials are used to protect the privacy of the students.) Respondent hit K.L. with the 

wrist rest on the inside of his left leg and directed him to put his foot down on the 

ground. Soon after, the class ended, and the students left the room. 

20. 

K.L. and his mother credibly testified at hearing. K.L. and his mother 

explained that on the afternoon of May 23, 2019, when K.L. was home, he told his 

mother what had happened respondent’s PE class and K.L. showed his mother his leg. 

A red and green bruise had developed on the inside of K.L.’s left knee. The bruise was 

approximately one and one-half inches long and one-half of an inch high, and the 

coloring had a light to medium darkness. The hitting caused K.L. some pain, and after 

the hit, the point of contact continued to feel sore for about one week. That evening, 

K.L. and his mother attended a robotics event at which students from multiple schools 

presented their robotics projects. K.L. and his mother saw respondent their; K.L. said 

“hi” to respondent but neither K.L. nor his mother discussed the hitting of K.L.’s leg or 

the resulting bruise with respondent. 

/// 

8 

21. 

The following morning, K.L. and his mother met with Rebecca Harris, then 

principal of Dickison, and reported the incident. Principal Harris credibly testified at 

hearing. She took notes of her discussion with K.L. and took a photograph of K.L.’s leg 

(Exh. 23), which continued to show the bruising described above. Principal Harris 

reported the matter to the Department of Children and Family Services, the District’s 

school police, the Compton Sheriff, and to Kanika White, Ed.D, then Chief Human 

Resources Officer for the District. In addition, Principal Harris interviewed four students 

in respondent’s PE class who witnessed the incident, J.N., A.R., C.G., and E.M, as well as 

Rene Fisk, a teacher at Dickison. 

22. 

The four students Principal Harris interviewed reported the following: 

respondent walked up to K.L. and hit him on the leg with a rubbery object; respondent 

also hit C.G. on the arm, after which C.G. said, “ow,” and hit E.M. on the shoulder; E.M. 

and C.G. stated the hitting was not hard and E.M. commented that the hitting was 

“soft;” A.R., who observed the hitting, believed the hitting was not hard; C.G. 

commented that he believed respondent was just playing around with the students. 

(Exh. 22, A170.) Though Principal Harris’s notes indicate these students stated 

respondent “hit” C.G. and E.M. with the wrist rest, based on the evidence presented it 

was only established by clear and convincing evidence respondent tapped C.G. and 

E.M. with wrist rest. (See Factual Findings 29 and 30.) 

23. 

The investigation by the authorities took two days and included 

interviews with students and staff at Dickinson, as well as interviews of K.L. and his 

mother at their home. Based on the open layout of the Dickinson administrative office 

and the number of interviews conducted by the authorities over two days, the 

Dickinson staff were negatively affected by respondent’s conduct due to the 

interruption of daily business and events. 

9 

24. 

Rene Fisk was one of K.L.’s teachers. Both Ms. Fisk and K.L. reported to 

Principal Harris, and K.L. testified at hearing, that within a few days of the incident and 

while in Ms. Fisk’s class, some students criticized or taunted K.L. for reporting 

respondent to Principal Harris and accused K.L. of getting respondent fired. Ms. Fisk 

apologized to K.L. for the students’ behavior and told the students their comments 

were inappropriate. K.L. found the students’ behavior distressing. 

25. 

At hearing, K.L. and his mother described how respondent’s conduct 

affected K.L. In addition to the taunting by some students, K.L. transferred to a 

different school to avoid seeing respondent, which meant needing to make new 

friends and meet new teachers. K.L.’s grades dropped and K.L. and his mother 

speculated it was because of the stress of the incident and because his new school did 

not have quality teachers. 

26. 

The District did not interview respondent during its investigation. Based 

on its investigation, on May 28, 2019, the District placed respondent on administrative 

leave and directed respondent to not contact K.L. or his family or other Dickison 

students. 

27.  Dr. White, the Chief Human Resources Officer for the District at the time 

of the investigation, credibly testified at hearing. After placing respondent on 

administrative leave, and between June 5 and September 11, 2019, the District 

attempted to meet with respondent approximately five times to discuss the incident. 

However, these meetings were rescheduled or canceled at the behest of respondent’s 

counsel who had scheduling conflicts. 

/// 

/// 

10 

RESPONDENT’S ADMISSION 

28. 

At hearing, respondent explained he was walking around the classroom, 

using a computer wrist rest to tap students he had called on to answer questions. 

Respondent saw K.L. had his left foot on the leg of a table and was tying his shoe. 

Respondent believed this behavior to be unsafe and inappropriate. When he walked 

past K.L. he touched or tapped the inside of K.L.’s leg with the wrist wrest and directed 

him to put his feet on the ground. 

29. 

Respondent disputes he “hit” K.L.’s leg, as alleged. Rather, he admitted to 

touching K.L.’s leg with the wrist wrest and did not dispute that the wrist wrest 

touching K.L. resulted in bruising to K.L.’s leg. Different words were used during 

complainant’s examination of respondent, including “whack” and “strike” but 

respondent did not agree he hit, struck, or whacked K.L.’s leg. Respondent disagreed 

with complainant’s characterization of the contact because he asserted he did not use 

force, or intentionally use force, to cause physical harm to K.L., and had no intention of 

causing harm to K.L. Nonetheless, respondent did not defend his behavior and does 

not know why he chose to touch K.L. with the wrist wrest, or touch the other students 

with the wrist wrest, and believes he used extremely poor judgment that day in the 

class. 

30. 

The Merriam-Webster Online Dictionary provides the following relevant 

definitions of the verb “to hit”: “to come in quick forceful contact with [¶] . . .[¶] to 

strike (something, such as a ball) with an object (such as a bat, club, or racket) so as to 

impart or redirect motion [¶] . . .[¶] to cause to come into contact [¶] . . .[¶] to deliver 

(something, such as a blow) by action [¶] . . .[¶] to apply forcefully or suddenly [¶] . . 

.[¶].” (https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/hit.) 

11 

31. 

The Merriam-Webster Online Dictionary provides the following relevant 

definitions of the verb “to tap”: “to strike lightly especially with a slight sound . . . to 

give a light blow with.” (https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/tap.) 

32. 

In consideration of the evidence presented, complainant established by 

clear and convincing evidence respondent hit K.L.’s leg with the wrist rest. Respondent 

used the wrist rest to come into quick contact with K.L.’s leg to redirect K.L.’s leg onto 

the floor and respondent used enough force to cause a bruise. While it was not 

established respondent intended to use any amount of force against K.L., he used 

enough force against K.L. to cause a bruise and, thereby, hit K.L. with the wrist rest. As 

provided in Factual Finding 22, complainant established by clear and convincing 

evidence respondent tapped C.G. and E.M. with the wrist rest but did not establish he 

hit C.G. and E.M. with the wrist rest. 

IMPEACHMENT OF RESPONDENT 

33. 

Complainant attempted to impeach respondent’s credibility with the 

testimony he provided at his November 6, 2020, deposition. At hearing, respondent 

denied touching K.L. more than once with the wrist rest; however, during his 

deposition, respondent initially testified he had touched K.L. only once, to direct him 

to get his foot off the table, but then added to his answer that he had also touched 

K.L. a second time to have K.L. give respondent an answer to a question. (Exh. 25, p. 

A309.) After reviewing the transcript at hearing, respondent acknowledged he may 

have touched K.L. a second time with the wrist rest. 

34. 

Respondent’s testimony at the deposition does not rise to the level of 

impeaching respondent’s credibility. Rather, the prior inconsistent statement 

demonstrated respondent did not explicitly recall, without his memory being 

12 

refreshed, all of the events of May 23, 2019. However, throughout his testimony at 

hearing respondent provided candid and detailed answers, admitting many of the 

assertions made against him, and corrected his testimony when clarification was 

provided. Accordingly, respondent’s credibility was not impeached, and his testimony 

is credited. 

Aggravating Factors 

35. 

Complainant alleged three aggravating factors: (a) respondent's 

misconduct significantly harmed a child trusted to his care, significantly harmed the 

public or educational system; (b) respondent's misconduct was surrounded by, or 

followed by bad faith, dishonesty or other violation of the laws governing educators, 

including section 49001; and (c) respondent's misconduct evidences multiple acts of 

wrongdoing or demonstrate a pattern of misconduct. 

36. 

Complainant established by clear and convincing evidence aggravating 

factors (a) and (b): respondent’s conduct significantly harmed K.L., a child entrusted 

into respondent’s care, and respondent’s conduct constituted corporal punishment as 

defined in section 49001. However, complainant failed to establish by clear and 

convincing evidence aggravating factor (c), regarding multiple acts of wrongdoing and 

a pattern of misconduct A significant portion of the evidence complainant presented 

at hearing went towards establishing this aggravating factor. However, the evidence as 

to aggravating factor (c) was either irrelevant or not credible. Nonetheless, as the 

evidence was presented at hearing, factual findings will be made regarding the 

evidence of alleged prior misconduct and multiple acts of wrongdoing. 

/// 

/// 

13 

ADDITIONAL ALLEGED INAPPROPRIATE CONDUCT AND RELATED WARNINGS 

Additional Alleged Inappropriate Conduct 

37.  Other than the hitting of K.L.’s leg, complainant did not allege as cause 

for discipline additional conduct by respondent. However, complainant introduced a 

District Formal Observation of respondent, the testimony of Principal Harris and Dr. 

White, and the declarations of additional District students to establish respondent 

engaged in additional inappropriate conduct including the following (collectively, “the 

additional allegations”): yelling at and using profanity towards students; requiring 

students to repeat PE exercises that were too hard to perform; and carrying a plastic 

bat during class, and sometimes touching students with the bat and throwing the bat 

at students. Because these additional allegations were not contained in the Accusation 

or First Amended Accusation, complainant failed to provide respondent proper notice 

of the additional allegations of conduct that was presented at hearing as a basis for 

credential discipline, thereby denying respondent the ability to prepare his defense 

against the additional allegations (Gov. Code, § 11503, subd. (a).) Accordingly, the 

evidence presented to establish the additional allegations is surplusage and is given 

little weight, and to the extent proven by clear and convincing evidence it will not be 

considered as cause for discipline, but it will be considered when assessing the degree 

of discipline. 

38. 

Complainant introduced a declaration of C.G., and declarations of five 

other students, B.D., V.G., M.G., A.P., and C.Z., to establish the additional allegations. 

(Exh. 24.) The declarations were written in November 2020, at least 18 months after the 

incident and after the students were taught by respondent. Other than C.G.’s 

declaration, the other five student declarations were not written by students who 

observed the incident. Rather, they were written by students who were in respondent’s 

14 

PE class during either the 2017-2018 or the 2018-2019 school years at either 

Longfellow or Dickison. 

39. 

Pursuant to Government Code section 11514, subdivision (a), the 

declarations submitted at hearing to establish the additional allegations of 

inappropriate conduct are given the same weight as if the declarants testified orally. 

However, the content of the student declarations failed to provide an adequate 

foundation for the facts alleged: the student declarants do not specify time or place of 

the events; the declarations were written more than 18 months after the incident and 

after the time the students were in class with respondent, raising questions as to the 

reliability of the student declarants’ memories; and the student declarants did not 

provide a factual basis for the conclusions included in their declarations, such as their 

conclusions the PE exercises respondent gave them were too hard. Accordingly, the 

contents of the student declarations are given little evidentiary weight. 

40. 

C.G.’s November 2020 declaration was inconsistent with the information 

he provided to Principal Harris in May 2019. In 2019, C.G. described respondent’s 

behavior as “playing” and that respondent did not hit hard with the wrist rest; in his 

November 2020 declaration C.G. stated when respondent hit him on the shoulder it 

stung and that he hit K.L. “pretty hard.” (Exh. 22, p. A170; Exh. 24, p. A184.) No 

explanation was provided to explain C.G.’s inconsistent accounts of respondent’s 

conduct. Based on C.G.’s inconsistent statements, and for the reasons cited in Factual 

Finding 38, C.G.’s statements in his declaration are given little evidentiary weight and 

fail to establish respondent hit K.L. hard with the wrist rest. 

41. 

C.G. also declared respondent used profanity in class; similarly, some of 

the other five students declared respondent yelled and used profanity during class, 

such as “shit” and “damn.” (Id. at pp. A175, A179.) K.L. also testified that respondent 

15 

yelled at times during P.E. class when students were not performing the PE exercises 

correctly and K.L. found the yelling intimidating. In addition, some of the student 

declarants stated respondent would require students to perform exercises that were 

“too hard” or to repeat exercises, or run extra laps or do pushups, if the students did 

not complete the original exercise correctly. (Id. at p. A175.) As provided below, 

respondent admitted that at times he used profanity when speaking to his students. 

Complainant established by clear and convincing evidence respondent at times used 

profanity with his students and yelled at the students in such a way as to cause them 

to be intimidated. Complainant did not establish by clear and convincing evidence 

respondent’s PE instruction was too hard or inappropriate. 

42.  M.G. declared that one day he was making inappropriate comments and 

respondent told him to stop and then poked M.G. in the eye with a plastic bat 

respondent often carried with him during class. (Id. at p. A181); A.P. alleged that once 

respondent threw the bat at him, but it did not hit him (Id. at p. A186). Respondent 

denied this behavior. Based on the unreliability of the student declarations 

complainant failed to establish the conduct alleged by M.G. or A.P. behavior by clear 

and convincing evidence. 

43. 

K.L.’s testimony and the review of the students’ declarations during 

hearing was the first-time respondent had heard that his students were intimidated by 

him yelling. Respondent was distressed to learn this, as one of his primary teaching 

goals is to establish mentor-like teacher-student relationships with his students. 

Respondent acknowledged he often spoke loudly to students and explained he often 

taught outside on the school yard to over 30 students and yelling was often necessary 

to be heard. Respondent did not recall yelling at students but did not dispute the 

students’ accounts of him yelling or of them feeling intimidated. 

16 

44. 

Respondent admitted at times using profanity during class, though he 

agreed this was not the best decision. Respondent stands by his decisions to have his 

students repeat exercises that were performed incorrectly because in doing so he was 

trying to teach the common core PE standards. Respondent disagrees his PE lessons 

were too hard as he followed the common core curriculum when developing his 

lessons. Respondent acknowledged carrying around a small plastic bat at times during 

his classes; he used the bat as a pointer to provide directions or at other times as a 

means to physically demonstrate what he was saying to students, for example to show 

them where their deltoid or metatarsals were located because he found the 

elementary and middle school students often did not understand his verbal directions 

without providing a physical example. 

Related Warnings 

45. 

Principal Harris testified regarding a 2018 Formal Observation (Exh. 18) 

respondent received on March 9, 2018, by evaluator Mario Marcos. During the 2017-

2018 school year, respondent was assigned to teach PE at Longfellow and at Kelly 

Elementary School. Mr. Marcos conducted the observation at Longfellow between 

10:00 a.m. and 11:10 a.m. Mr. Marcos primarily rated respondent as “Meets Standards 

with Growth Recommended.” He noted concerns with respondent’s organization of 

the subject matter; his failure to prepare lesson plans and establish learning targets; 

his use of time; and his assessment of student learning. Based on the Formal 

Observation, respondent was placed on a Teacher Improvement Plan. 

46. 

In reviewing the 2018 Formal Observation’s Recommendation and 

Expectations section during her testimony, Principal Harris pointed out a directive 

provided to respondent by the principal of Longfellow, Joanne Davidson, and Mr. 

Marcos’s follow-up directive. 

17 

On Monday, November 4, Ms. Davidson met with you and 

she directed you not to touch the students. A female 

student had indicated that you put your hand on her 

shoulder and you pulled her bra strap. At the end of the 

lesson yesterday, I observed that you high-fived several 

female students. Although this may not seem inappropriate, 

in the future avoid any physical contact with students, 

particularly after you become aware of the concern that was 

raised by a student earlier in the year, and the directive that 

you received from your Principal. 

(Exh. 18, p. A153.) Neither Mr. Marcos nor Ms. Davidson testified at hearing and to the 

extent any written warning or notes of Ms. Davidson’s November 4, 2017, meeting 

were made, they were not submitted at hearing. Respondent denied pulling a 

student’s bra strap, but acknowledged, upon review of the document during hearing, 

the directive was provided to him in the 2018 Formal Observation. Respondent did not 

recall the November 4, 2017, meeting with Ms. Davidson or the bra-strap allegation. 

Respondent acknowledged that during his PE classes, even after this directive, he 

would high-five students. Complainant established by clear and convincing evidence 

respondent was provided the November 4, 2017, and March 9, 2018, directives by Ms. 

Davidson but failed to establish by clear and convincing evidence respondent pulled a 

student’s bra strap or touched the student’s shoulder. 

47. 

Principal Harris also pointed out a directive in the 2018 Formal 

Observation noting that Ms. Davidson had informed respondent about parents' 

complaints throughout the school year, including parent concerns respondent made 

students do push-ups under very hot weather conditions or on an inappropriate 

18 

surface, to the point, one student ended up with a rock indention on his hand. (Exh. 18, 

p. A153.) Respondent acknowledged he had his students do push-ups outside on a 

hot day, however he explained he delivered the lesson in accordance with the 

common core curriculum and the school did not have any other location or facility in 

which to conduct his class. Complainant failed to establish by clear and convincing 

evidence respondent’s PE directions or requirements of his students were punitive, 

violated school policy, or were inappropriate. 

48. 

Finally, during her testimony Principal Harris recalled one occasion when 

she observed respondent conducting his PE class and he was carrying the plastic bat. 

She gave respondent a look to communicate he should put away the bat and 

respondent put the bat in the classroom. Principal Harris did not discuss the bat with 

respondent or provide him any spoken or written direction or warning regarding the 

bat. 

49. 

Dr. White testified regarding a previous District warning provided to 

respondent. On September 13, 2014, while teaching at Dominguez High School, 

respondent received a written warning based on his conduct on August 27, 2014, 

when he used profanity in the classroom, stating words to the effect of, “A piece of 

paper don’t mean s*** to me.” (Exh. 20, p. A168.) Respondent was directed to not use 

profanity with students or in the classroom. 

DISTRICT’S EMPLOYEE HANDBOOK 

50.  Dr. White affirmed the District’s Employee Handbook (District handbook) 

admitted as Exhibit 19 was an accurate copy of the District handbook applicable at the 

time of respondent’s misconduct. The District handbook provides that “Inappropriate 

Conduct” includes conduct that endangers students, but is not limited to physical 

19 

violence. (Exh. 19, p. A157.) Principal 1 of the District handbook, Ethical Conduct 

Toward Students (Exh. 19, p. A161), provides the following: 

The professional educator, in accepting his or her position 

of public trust, measures success not only by the progress 

of each student toward realization of his or her personal 

potential, but also as a citizen of the greater community of 

the republic. 

1. The professional educator deals considerately and justly 

with each student, and seeks to resolve problems, including 

discipline, according to law and school policy. 

2. The professional educator does not intentionally expose 

the student to disparagement. [¶] . . .[¶] 

4. The professional educator makes a constructive effort to 

protect the student from conditions detrimental to learning, 

health, or safety. [¶] . . .[¶] 

51. 

Consistent with the District handbook, Principal Harris and Dr. White 

explained that hitting a student is not allowed under any circumstances and 

respondent’s act of hitting K.L.’s leg violated his duties and responsibilities as a 

teacher, and violated the trust placed in him to care for and educate his students. Dr. 

White further affirmed that the District communicated to respondent in its September 

9, 2019, Notice of Possible Dismissal/Immediate Suspension Without Pay, respondent’s 

conduct amounted to corporal punishment as prohibited by section 49001 which 

defines corporal punishment as any “willful infliction of, or willfully causing the 

infliction of, physical pain on a pupil.” 

20 

Disciplinary Considerations 

52.  On June 16, 2008, in the criminal proceeding entitled The People of the 

State of California v. Darryl Gideon (Super. Ct. L.A County, Case No. 8MP00755), 

respondent pled nolo contendere to, and was convicted of, violating Vehicle Code 

sections 23152, subdivision (b) (driving while having 0.08% and more, by weight, of 

alcohol in his blood), and section 20002, subdivision (a) (hit and run), misdemeanors. 

The Court suspended imposition of sentence, placed respondent on three-years’ 

summary probation, and ordered respondent to comply with terms and conditions of 

probation including: serve 13 days in jail, with credit for two days served or, in the 

alternative, complete 11 days of Cal Trans service; complete a three-month First 

Offender Alcohol Program; complete an AB-541 Program and pay fines and fees. 

53. 

The underlying criminal conduct occurred on October 18, 2007. 

Respondent’s blood alcohol content (BAC) was determined to be .12 percent. 

Respondent admitted the criminal convictions and his criminal behavior and explained 

that October 18, 2007, marked his own birthday and the anniversary of his close 

friend’s death. Respondent had not accepted the loss of his close friend and was 

depressed; he consumed an excessive amount of alcohol and used poor judgment and 

drove while intoxicated. This behavior occurred over 15 years ago, and respondent has 

not repeated this behavior. 

54.  On May 28, 1998, in the case entitled The People of the State of 

California v. Darryl Gideon (Orange County Sup. Ct., Case No. AN98NM04034), 

respondent pled guilty to, and was convicted of, violating Penal Code sections 484f, 

subdivision (a) (forgery of an access card), and 148.9 (false identification to a police 

officer), misdemeanors. Respondent was sentenced to 90 days in jail, placed on court 

probation for three years and ordered to pay fines and fees. The underlying criminal 

21 

conduct occurred on April 23, 1998, when respondent used a fraudulent Visa card to 

purchase a computer at a Comp USA Store in Anaheim, California. 

55. 

Respondent admitted the criminal convictions and his criminal behavior. 

Respondent explained that at the time of his offense he was young and involved with 

the wrong crowd. Respondent’s criminal behavior occurred over 25 years ago, and he 

has not repeated this behavior. 

Respondent’s Evidence 

TEACHING CAREER 

56. 

Respondent began his teaching career in 1998 working for Inglewood 

Unified School District, and began working for the District on October 4, 1999. 

Respondent has had multiple assignments within the District, including Dominguez 

High School, Dominguez Continuation School, Thorogood Marshall High School, 

Compton High School; Centennial High School, and Centennial Continuation School; 

Willowbrook Middle School; Walley Middle School; Davis Middle School, and 

Enterprise Middle School; and Dickison Elementary; Kelly Elementary, and Longfellow 

Elementary. Throughout his teaching career, respondent held multiple credentials, 

allowing him to teach multiple subjects, including social studies, alternate education, 

credit recovery, and PE, and multiple grades, from elementary school through high 

school. 

57. 

Respondent’s multiple credentials provided the District flexibility, 

allowing the District to reassign respondent to a new assignment as needed. After 

teaching at Dominguez High School for multiple years, the District reassigned 

respondent for the 2017-2018 school year to teach PE at Longfellow and Kelly 

Elementary School. Though respondent had previously taught PE, he had strengthened 

22 

his teaching as a high school teacher at Dominguez High School, becoming active in 

extracurricular activities and mentoring opportunities, and he did not want to be 

reassigned as an elementary school PE teacher. At the conclusion of the 2017-2018 

school, after he received the 2018 Formal Observation and Teacher Improvement Plan, 

respondent requested to be reassigned. The District reassigned respondent to teach 

PE at Dickison and Longfellow Elementary. 

58. 

Since his credentials were reinstated in February 2020, respondent has 

been working regularly, generally five days per week, as a substitute high school 

teacher teaching all subjects for four school districts: Centinela Valley Union School 

District; Brea Olinda High School District; Newport Mesa Unified School District; and 

Capistrano Unified School District. Respondent has chosen to limit his substitute 

teaching work to teaching in high schools as he believes he is better suited to teach 

the age range of high school students. Respondent has reflected on the errors he 

made while teaching at Dickison and has worked hard to steadily improve his teaching 

practice. Respondent appreciates the variety of teaching experiences he has had these 

past few years as a substitute teacher teaching in schools which range from highly 

funded and resourced to schools that are underfunded and under resourced. 

59.  When respondent is not teaching, he is active in his community. He 

regularly coaches and referees community sports teams, tutors students, and 

volunteers with mentoring organizations. 

ADDITIONAL PERFORMANCE EVALUATIONS 

60. 

Respondent requested his confidential personnel file from the District 

and submitted into evidence seven additional performance evaluations contained in 

his file for the 2001-2005 school years and the , 2010-2013 school years. In these 

23 

evaluations, respondent was overwhelmingly assessed as meeting standards and 

exceeding expectations in school involvement. Relevant excerpts from these 

evaluations include the following positive observations about respondent’s teaching 

skills: 

•  Respondent’s 2001-2004 evaluations generally assessed respondent as 

meeting the standards on all areas of evaluation and assessed respondent as 

a very effective teacher. 

•  During the 2004-2005 school year, respondent was very organized as an 

instructor and had an excellent rapport with his students. Respondent set 

high expectations for his students and demanded they conduct themselves 

in an appropriate manner. On many occasions he went over and above the 

expectations and job description of his regular "independent studies" 

teaching assignment by taking students to the computer lab and helping 

them prepare for the SAT exam, and filling out Financial Aid packets. (Exh. C, 

p. B35.) 

•  During the 2010-2011 school year, respondent was instrumental in helping 

to keep the hallways and campus free of interruption during passing periods 

and before classes and after dismissal. (Exh. B, p. B33.) “He must be 

commended for stepping up to help out during unexpected incidents and 

during special events. He is infrequently absent and is usually standing at his 

door to greet and receive and to dismiss students. He is also very receptive 

to suggestions for improvement.” (Id.) Respondent needed to work on his 

patience and to understand he is teaching students what he needs them to 

learn, and that they do not come to him already knowing the content. He 

24 

must seek help to develop cooperative learning strategies to help develop 

teamwork for students. 

•  During the 2011-2012 school year, respondent continued to grow and 

understand his students’ cognition and recognize individual differences. 

Respondent was energetic and usually went above and beyond the call of 

duty to support and promote the school’s objectives. Respondent was a 

team player and consistently helped clear campus, assist with crowd control 

during activities, and assisted administrators and other colleagues during 

unexpected incidents and events. (Exh. B, p. B24.) 

•  During the 2012-2013 school year, respondent’s students were engaged, 

worked independently and together in groups; clearly understood the rules 

of the class, and met expectations. (Exh. B, p. B20.) Respondent held his 

students accountable and engaged with them the entire class period. The 

evaluator recommended respondent push students in all classes to do more 

critical thinking and was encouraged to become more involved in school 

activities outside of class, because his leadership skills would benefit the 

students at Dominguez High School. 

RESPONDENT’S REMORSE 

61. 

Respondent expressed his sincere and apologetic remorse at hearing. He 

expressed it directly to K.L. and K.L.’s mother before asking them questions. During his 

own testimony, respondent described his regret for causing this tragedy to K.L. and his 

family and how devastated he was to hear of the physical and emotional pain his 

actions had caused. The hearing was the first opportunity respondent had to hear 

directly of the injury he caused and its effects on K.L. He has learned through the 

25 

hearing process that he did not do his job, but rather greatly missed the mark by 

negatively impacting students. 

62. 

Since his resignation from the District respondent completed an anger 

management course ordered by the criminal court in regards to criminal charges 

brought against respondent surrounding respondent’s misconduct, which have since 

been dismissed. Respondent also voluntarily completed approximately 10 sessions of 

individual therapy. He reflects on his teaching practice daily when working as a 

substitute teacher; respondent is keenly aware that his voice and actions can 

negatively impact students, and every day he teaches he is committed to uphold the 

responsibilities of a teacher. 

CHARACTER REFERENCES 

63. 

Respondent submitted seven character reference letters written in July 

2021 by Monica Gonzalez, Stephanie Westbrook, Joyce Copeland, Shaheen Johnson, 

Omar Montgomery, Shonnda Smith, and Robert Mosley. Mr. Mosely also testified on 

behalf of respondent at hearing. The seven authors have known respondent between 

five and 36 years, and they spoke to respondent’s commitment to his student’s 

education, safety, welfare, and futures, as well as his commitment to his community. 

The authors’ statements and Mr. Mosley’s testimony corroborated respondent’s 

testimony regarding his career, work performance, and commitment to his community, 

students and schools. 

64.  Ms. Gonzalez is a science teacher for the Los Angeles Unified School 

District and has know respondent for 10 years. Ms. Gonzalez and respondent worked 

together at Dominguez High School; they worked cooperatively together on lesson 

plans, discipline plans, and school improvement plans focused on the social-emotional 

26 

well-being of their students. In her letter, Ms. Gonzalez shared a story of their work 

together wherein she had a student whose brother was killed in gang violence. The 

student became angry and disengaged from school and was determined to join a 

gang. Ms. Gonzalez and respondent worked with the school to temporarily transfer the 

student to respondent’s class where, over a few weeks, respondent developed a firm 

mentoring relationship with the student, shared his own personal experience, and 

assisted the student with bringing back positivity into his life while addressing his 

desire to have a sense of belonging. 

65.  Ms. Westbrook is a College and Career Specialist at Dominguez High 

School. She met respondent when they worked together at the Vanguard Learning 

Center in 2000. Ms. Westbrook observed respondent to be a dynamic and 

conscientious individual with a strong work ethic, a problem solver, and a dedicated 

and highly involved teacher, tutoring low achievers and mentoring high achievers. 

Respondent worked closely with the Ladies and Gents club to mentor students, 

mentoring over 25 students on principals of scholarship and community service, while 

ensuring they maintained high academic standards and exposing them to several 

social environments and community service projects. 

66.  Ms. Copeland has worked as a Textbook Inventory Assistant at 

Dominguez High School for 36 years. She met respondent in 2013 when he worked at 

Dominguez High School as a social study teacher. During that time she observed his 

class and found the students engaged in his lessons. Ms. Copeland found respondent 

to be passionate about student learning and to model nonviolence, patience, and 

diligence. 

67.  Ms. Johnson is an Assistant Professor at Long Beach City College and has 

20 years of experience working the field of education. Ms. Johnson has known 

27 

respondent for 15 years; she met him while working as a long-term substitute for the 

District and always found respondent carried himself in a respectful and professional 

manner. Respondent was one of the first teachers to extend support to Ms. Johnson 

and provided her detailed lesson plans and shared his own lesson plans if other 

teachers did not provide any to her. 

68.  Mr. Montgomery is the President of the Aurora, Colorado Branch of the 

National Association for the Advancement of Colored People and has known 

respondent for 20 years. Mr. Montgomery has found respondent to be very influential 

in the lives of students and a dependable role model for youth. He has observed 

respondent support students who have been left behind by the system and helped 

them overcome adversity to graduate high school and pursue their lives. 

69.  Ms. Smith is the Deputy Executive Director of Public Works in Mobil, 

Alabama, and has known respondent for over 10 years. She and respondent worked 

together in the District PE department when respondent coached the football team. 

Ms. Smith observed respondent hold students to a high expectation of behavior on 

the field and develop mentor relationships with his students. Respondent also helped 

Ms. Smith personally with her nephew who was heading down the wrong path. 

Respondent took time to talk with her nephew and searched for opportunities for her 

nephew to get involved in extracurricular activities. 

70.  Mr. Mosley wrote a character reference letter and testified at hearing. He 

met respondent during the 2014-2015 school year when he was in 11th grade at 

Dominguez High School where respondent was his history teacher. Since then, 

respondent has been a life and career mentor to Mr. Mosley and influenced Mr. 

Mosley to become a teacher. Mr. Mosley recalled that when he was respondent’s 

student, at the end of each class respondent would say to his students, “be safe,” and 

28 

he would regularly talk with students about their education and obstacles in their lives. 

During Mr. Mosley’s junior year, he was involved in a drive-by incident that placed him 

in the hospital; respondent was one of only two teachers who visited him in the 

hospital and assisted Mr. Mosley with staying current with his schoolwork to ensure he 

could timely graduate with this class. 

71. 

Since Mr. Mosley’s graduation from high school, respondent has advised 

Mr. Mosely on volunteer work and career paths. During the 2018-2019 school year, on 

approximately five occasions Mr. Mosely observed respondent teaching PE at Dickison 

to learn about teaching as a career. Mr. Mosely has now completed California State 

University of Dominguez Hills College where he obtained his bachelor’s degree in 

liberal studies. Mr. Mosley is currently a tutor and program leader with Think Together, 

a non-profit afterschool program which provides services to the District. Mr. Mosley’s 

plan is to become a teacher for the District. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

Commission’s Authority 

1. 

Established by the Bergeson Act (§ 44200, et seq.), the Commission’s 

primary function relates to the licensing and development of professional standards 

for public school teachers in California. (§ 44225.) 

2. 

The Commission must privately admonish, publicly reprove, revoke or 

suspend a credential for the following reasons: immoral or unprofessional conduct; the 

persistent defiance of, and refusal to obey, the laws regulating the duties of persons 

serving in the public school system; any cause that would have warranted the denial of 

an application for a credential or permit; or for evident unfitness for service. (§ 44421.) 

29 

3. 

The Commission may deny any application for the issuance of a 

credential if the applicant has committed any act involving moral turpitude. A denial of 

a credential for acts involving moral turpitude must be based on reasons related to the 

applicant's fitness to teach or fitness to perform other duties for which that applicant 

is certificated, or competence to perform the duties which the permit would authorize 

the applicant to perform. (§ 44345, subd. (e).) 

Burden and Standard of Proof 

4. 

Complainant bears the burden of proving the existence of grounds for 

disciplining respondent’s credentials and must do so by clear and convincing evidence 

to a reasonable certainty. (Daniels v. Department of Motor Vehicles (1983) 33 Cal.3d 

532, 536 [“When an administrative agency initiates an action to suspend or revoke a 

license, the burden of proving the facts necessary to support the action rests with the 

agency making the allegation”]; Gardener v. Commission on Professional Competence 

(1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1036, 1039-1040 [recognizing that the clear and convincing 

evidence standard applies to proceedings to discipline a teacher’s credential, whereas 

the lesser preponderance of the evidence standard applies to proceedings to dismiss a 

teacher from particular employment].) 

5. 

“The courts have defined clear and convincing evidence as evidence 

which is so clear as to leave no substantial doubt and as sufficiently strong to 

command the unhesitating assent of every reasonable mind. [Citations.] It has been 

said that a preponderance calls for probability, while clear and convincing proof 

demands a high probability [citations].” (In re Terry D. (1978) 83 Cal.App.3d 890, 899; 

italics original.) 

/// 

30 

Cause to Discipline Respondent’s Credential 

UNPROFESSIONAL CONDUCT 

6. 

Unprofessional conduct is “that which violates the rules or ethical code of 

a profession or such conduct which is unbecoming a member of a profession in good 

standing.” (Board of Educ. of City of Los Angeles v. Swan (1953) 41 Cal.2d 546, 553 

[overruled by Bekiaris v. Board of Education (1972) 6 Cal.3d 575 on other grounds].) 

7. 

“. . . [T]he calling [of a teacher] is so intimate, its duties so delicate, the 

things in which a teacher might prove unworthy or would fail are so numerous that 

they are incapable of enumeration in any legislative enactment . . . the teacher is 

entrusted with the custody of children and their high preparation for useful life. His 

habits, his speech, his good name, his cleanliness, the wisdom and propriety of his 

unofficial utterances, his associations, all are involved. His ability to inspire children 

and to govern them, his power as a teacher, and the character for which he stands are 

matters of major concern in a teacher's selection and retention.” (Goldsmith v. Board 

of Education (1924) 66 Cal.App. 157, 169.) 

8. 

Complainant established by clear and convincing evidence respondent’s 

conduct of hitting K.L. with a wrist rest and causing a bruise was unprofessional 

conduct. Respondent’s conduct violated the trust placed in him to educate K.L. in safe 

environment without imparting corporal punishment onto K.L. Respondent’s conduct 

violated the rules and ethical code of teaching, including section 49001, prohibiting 

corporal punishment, and the District handbook which prohibits teachers from 

engaging in violence and requires them to protect student from conditions 

detrimental to learning, health, or safety. (Factual Findings 17-33, 35-36, 50-51.) 

/// 

31 

ACTS OF MORAL TURPITUDE 

9. 

Moral turpitude has been defined as acts which are contrary to “honesty 

and good morals” (Young v. State Bar (1990) 50 Cal.3d 1204, 1217-1218), and as acts 

of “baseness, vileness or depravity in the private and social duties which a man owes 

to his fellow men or to society in general, contrary to the accepted and customary rule 

of right and duty between man and man . . . .” (Yakov v. Board of Medical Examiners 

(1968) 68 Cal.2d 67, 73 [citing In re Boyd (1957) 48 Cal.2d 69, 70].) 

10. 

Complainant established by clear and convincing evidence respondent’s 

act of hitting K.L. with a wrist rest and causing a bruise constituted an act of moral 

turpitude. Respondent’s conduct was contrary to good morals and was base, violating 

the duties respondent owed K.L. (Factual Findings 17-33, 35-36, 50-51.) 

IMMORAL CONDUCT 

11. 

The court in Board of Education of the San Francisco Unified School 

District v. Weiland, (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, found a teacher had committed 

immoral conduct when she falsified attendance records to maintain her course during 

the next semester of instruction. (Board of Education v. Weiland (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 

808, 811.) In so finding, the court relied on the definition of immoral conduct as 

provided in Orloff v. Los Angeles Turf Club (1951) 36 Cal.2d 734, where the Supreme 

Court quoted with approval the following statement from Words and Phrases, 

permanent edition, volume 20, pages 159-160: 

The term “immoral” has been defined generally as that 

which is hostile to the welfare of the general public and 

contrary to good morals. Immorality has not been confined 

to sexual matters, but includes conduct inconsistent with 

32 

rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, 

dissoluteness; or as wilful, flagrant, or shameless conduct 

showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable 

members of the community, and as an inconsiderate 

attitude toward good order and the public welfare. (Orloff v. 

Los Angeles Turf Club (1951) 36 Cal.2d 734, 740.) 

12. 

Complainant established by clear and convincing evidence respondent’s 

act of hitting K.L. with a wrist rest and causing a bruise constituted immoral conduct. 

Respondent’s conduct was hostile to the welfare of K.L., willful, and demonstrated a 

moral indifference to his requirement to not cause physical harm or pain to a student. 

(Factual Findings 17-33, 35-36, 50-51.) 

EVIDENT UNFITNESS TO TEACH 

13. 

Unfitness for service has been defined as a fixed character trait 

“presumably not remediable merely on receipt of notice that one's conduct fails to 

meet the expectations of the employing school district,” which demonstrates the 

teacher is “clearly not fit, not adapted to or unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by 

reason of temperamental defects or inadequacies.” (Woodland Joint Unified School 

Dist. v. Commission on Professional Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444.) 

14. 

Immoral conduct, unprofessional conduct, and moral turpitude cannot be 

the basis for removal of a teacher unless that conduct indicates the teacher is unfit to 

teach. (Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 229, hereafter 

Morrison.) 

/// 

33 

MORRISON CRITERIA 

15.  Morrison sets forth criteria that assist the Commission in determining 

whether the teacher's fitness and overall impact on the students are likely to meet the 

Commission's standards. (Collectively referred to as “Morrison criteria” though 

established in additional regulatory and case law). The Morrison criteria must be 

analyzed to determine whether the cited conduct indicates unfitness for service. 

(Woodland Joint Unified School Dist. v. Commission on Professional Competence, 

supra, 2 Cal.App.4th at p. 1445, citing Board of Education v. Jack M. (1977) 19 Cal.3d 

691, 696.) “If the Morrison criteria are satisfied, the next step is to determine whether 

the ‘unfitness’ is ‘evident’; i.e., whether the offensive conduct is caused by a defect in 

temperament.” (Id.) 

16. 

The Morrison criteria include the following: the likelihood the conduct 

may have adversely affected students or fellow teachers; the degree of such adversity 

anticipated; the proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct; the type of teaching 

certificate held by the party involved; the extenuating or aggravating circumstances, if 

any, surrounding the conduct; the praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives 

resulting in the conduct; the likelihood of the recurrence of the questioned conduct; 

the extent to which disciplinary action may inflict an adverse impact or chilling effect 

upon the constitutional rights of the teacher involved or other teachers; and the 

notoriety and publicity accorded to the conduct (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80302, subd. 

(a); Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 229-30; Board of 

Education v. Jack M. (1977) 19 Cal.3d 691, fn. 5.) 

17. 

Aggravating factors are an event or circumstance which demonstrates 

that a greater degree of adverse action for an act of professional misconduct is 

needed to adequately protect the public, school children or the profession. 

34 

Complainant established by clear and convincing evidence two of the alleged 

aggravating factors: respondent’s misconduct violated the laws governing educators, 

including section 49001; and the misconduct significantly harmed a child entrusted to 

the care of respondent. (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80300, subd. (b)(3) & (4).) (Factual 

Finding.) 

18. 

A mitigating factor is an event or circumstance which demonstrates the 

public, schoolchildren and the profession would be adequately protected by a more 

lenient discipline or no discipline against respondent’s credential. Mitigating factors 

may include the following: the absence of any prior record of adverse action over 

many years of educational service, coupled with present misconduct which is not 

deemed most serious; a lack of harm to the person who is the object of the 

misconduct; emotional or physical difficulties suffered by respondent which 

substantially contributed to the misconduct if respondent has established through 

clear and convincing evidence that he no longer has such difficulties; a demonstration 

of good character of respondent attested to by references; detached action taken by 

respondent, which spontaneously demonstrate remorse at the time of the misconduct 

and recognition of the wrongdoing, which is designed to timely make amends for the 

consequences of the misconduct; the proximity or remoteness in time relative to the 

seriousness of the misconduct; or the nature and extent of subsequent rehabilitation. 

(Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80300, subd. (m).) 

19. 

A court may determine unfitness after considering the most pertinent 

Morrison factors and is not required to make findings on all the Morrison factors. 

(West Valley-Mission Community College Dist. v. Concepcion (1993) 16 Cal.App.4th 

1766, 1777.) 

/// 

35 

20.  Only the likelihood that the teacher’s conduct may have adversely 

affected students and other teachers, and not actual adverse impact, needs to be 

found. (Broney v. California Commission on Teacher Credentialing (2010) 184 

Cal.App.4th 462, 477.) 

ANALYSIS OF MORRISON CRITERIA 

21. 

Respondent’s conduct had an adverse effect on K.L. and on additional 

students and staff at Dickison. The degree of impact on K.L. was moderate, as he 

suffered a point in time injury and taunting by fellow students, and he voluntarily 

changed schools; complainant did not establish any drop in K.L.’s grades was due to 

respondent’s conduct. The degree of impact on the other students and staff at 

Dickison was at most minimal. 

22. 

Respondent’s conduct occurred four years ago and has not reoccurred 

during the past three years he has been substitute teaching. Respondent holds a clear 

single subject teaching credential with an authorization in general subjects, which 

authorizes him to teach student in elementary school through twelfth grade. 

23. 

Respondent’s conduct was not praiseworthy. Rather, respondent is to 

blame for his considerable poor judgement on May 23, 2019, and his unjustified 

motives to use a wrist rest to physically direct K.L. to place his foot on the floor. 

24.  Disciplinary action will not inflict an adverse impact or chilling effect 

upon the constitutional rights of respondent or other teachers. The evidence did not 

establish any notoriety or publicity accorded to respondent’s conduct. 

/// 

/// 

36 

Aggravating Factors 

25. 

Complainant established two aggravating factors by clear and convincing 

evidence: respondent’s misconduct violated section 49001 in that respondent, though 

without specific intention but by his act of willfully hitting K.L. with the wrist rest and 

causing K.L. a bruise and pain, willfully inflicted physical pain on K.L.; similarly, 

complainant established respondent’s misconduct significantly harmed K.L. 

26. 

Respondent’s criminal convictions for driving while under the influence of 

alcohol and committing a hit and run, and for forgery and providing a false 

identification card to the police, are given little weight. They occurred between 15 and 

25 years ago and the evidence did not establish any likelihood respondent would 

repeat his criminal behavior or that respondent’s criminal behavior was connected to 

his misconduct. 

Mitigating Factors 

27. 

Respondent established mitigating factors which demonstrates the 

public, schoolchildren and the profession would be adequately protected by a more 

lenient discipline than credential revocation. 

28. 

Respondent has been teaching for 25 years without incidents of related 

misconduct prior to the 2019 inadvertently significant touching of K.L., which 

Respondent acknowledges and regrets. 

29.  Most significantly, respondent demonstrated his good character through 

his own testimony and references who attested to respondent’s performance history 

as a teacher and community member who is committed to the wellbeing and 

advancement of his students, who volunteers with his students to provide them access 

37 

to educational and community opportunities, and who is active in community youth 

sports as a coach and referee. In addition, respondent acted soon after his misconduct 

to voluntarily attend therapy; though court ordered and not voluntary, respondent 

also completed an anger management course. Finally, respondent expressed his 

sincere recognition of his wrongdoing and remorse at hearing for his poor judgment 

and misconduct. 

30. 

Respondent’s misconduct occurred four years ago, and since that time 

respondent has consistently worked as a substitute teacher in high schools in four 

different school districts without incident and with daily attention to improving his 

performance as a teacher. Based on the rehabilitation established by respondent, his 

sincere remorse for his conduct, and his commitment to his teaching, students, and 

the community, the evidence did not establish a likelihood of recurrence of the 

respondent’s misconduct. 

31. 

In consideration of the Morrison criteria, complainant did not establish 

by clear and convincing evidence respondent is unfit to teach. Respondent’s extended 

career without similar conduct and his continued teaching without incident and with 

the continued pursuit of improving his teach practice demonstrate respondent does 

not have a fixed character trait that is not remediable. (Factual Findings 17-33, 35-36, 

50-51, 56-71). 

32. 

Revocation of respondent’s credentials is not warranted or necessary to 

protect the public. Rather, the public, schoolchildren, and the profession will be 

adequately protected by the more appropriate discipline of license suspension for 120 

days during which time respondent must complete, and must submit proof of 

completion to the Commission of, 40 hours of child development study as set forth in 

the Order below. 

38 

ORDER 

1. 

The Clear Single Subject Teaching Credential held by Respondent Darryl 

Gideon, and all other credentials, certificates, and authorizations issued to respondent, 

are suspended for 120 days from the effective date of this Order, during which time 

respondent must comply with the following 40 hours of child development study 

requirement. 

40 Hours of Child Development Study Requirement 

2. 

During the 120-day suspension, respondent must complete 40 hours of 

professional development or educational course work regarding, or must otherwise 

study, such as by reading books or online articles, child development. 

3. 

Respondent must submit proof of completion of the 40 hours of child 

development study requirement to the Commission not later than the final date of his 

suspension. 

4. 

Respondent must provide proof of completion of the 40 hours of child 

development study requirement to the Commission by: (a) submitting to the 

Commission documentation of 40 hours of professional development or course 

completion certificates of child development study; (b) by submitting a declaration 

signed under penalty of perjury by respondent attesting to how he satisfied the 40 

hours of child development study requirement, specifying the information he studied 

and time spent per task; or (c) a combination of (a) and (b) amounting to 40 hours of 

child development study. 

/// 

39 

5. 

Respondent’s failure to timely complete and submit proof of the 40 

hours of professional development requirement to the Commission will be cause for 

further disciplinary action by the Commission against respondent’s credentials. 

DATE: 

CHANTAL M. SAMPOGNA 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings 

40 

Chantal Sampogna (Jun 2, 2023 13:09 PDT)06/02/2023 
 
 
