BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the First Amended Accusation Against: 

ROBERT LANZ, Respondent 

Agency Case No. 2-135252565 

OAH No. 2022060145 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Sean Gavin, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings (OAH), 

State of California, heard this matter by videoconference from November 1 through 

November 4, 2022, from Sacramento, California. 

Katelyn E. Docherty, Deputy Attorney General, represented Mary Vixie Sandy, 

Ed.D. (complainant), Executive Director of the California Commission on Teacher 

Credentialing (Commission). 

Ernest H. Tuttle III, Attorney at Law, represented respondent Robert Lanz, who 

was present throughout the hearing. 

Evidence was received and the hearing concluded on November 4, 2022. The 

record was held open until December 5, 2022, to allow complainant to file an 

Amended Accusation and for respondent to file a redacted copy of Exhibit II. 

Complainant and respondent filed the appropriate documents, the record closed, and 

the matter submitted for decision on December 5, 2022. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Procedural Background 

1. 

On March 24, 1998, the Commission issued respondent a Clear Multiple 

Subject Teaching Credential (teaching credential). On May 7, 2008, the Commission 

issued respondent a Clear Administrative Services Credential (administrative 

credential). On January 4, 2018, the Commission issued respondent an Activity 

Supervisor Clearance Credential (activity credential). The activity credential will expire 

on February 1, 2023, unless renewed or revoked. The teaching and administrative 

credentials will expire on April 1, 2023, unless renewed or revoked. 

On January 7, 1991, the Commission issue respondent a Certificate of Clearance, 

which expired on February 1, 1996. On July 1, 1991, the Commission issued respondent 

an Emergency 30-Day Substitute Teaching Credential, which expired on June 30, 1992. 

On September 24, 2001, the Commission issued respondent a Clear Crosscultural 

Language and Academic Development Certificate, which does not expire. On July 1, 

2002, the Commission issued respondent a Reading Certificate, which expired on June 

30, 2003. On July 18, 2005, the Commission issued respondent an Administrative 

Services Credential Certificate of Eligibility, which does not expire. On August 1, 2006, 

the Commission issued respondent a Preliminary Administrative Services Credential, 

which expired on September 1, 2011. 

Collectively, these credentials and certificates are referred to as respondent’s 

“credentials.” There was no evidence presented of prior discipline of the credentials. 

2 

2. 

On March 21, 2022, complainant, acting solely in her official capacity, 

signed and thereafter filed an Accusation seeking to discipline respondent’s 

credentials based on his alleged unprofessional conduct, evident unfitness for service, 

immoral conduct, moral turpitude, and persistent defiance of and refusal to obey the 

laws regulating the duties of persons serving in the public school system. On 

November 29, 2022, complainant filed and served on respondent a First Amended 

Accusation, which included one additional paragraph and alleged the facts therein as 

an additional basis for discipline under all five causes.1 Respondent timely filed a 

Notice of Defense and this hearing followed. 

Complainant’s Evidence 

COMPLAINT AND DISTRICT INVESTIGATION 

3. 

In approximately August 2018, respondent started working as the Vice 

Principal at Emilie J. Ross Middle School (RMS) in the Hughson Unified School District 

(District). He worked in an office suite with three other employees: Principal Luke 

Hibbard, Attendance Clerk Andrea Ruiz (Ms. Ruiz), and Mr. Hibbard’s secretary, Jovita 

Gutierrez. 

4. 

On March 22, 2020, Ms. Ruiz submitted a written complaint to the District 

about respondent’s conduct. In her complaint, Ms. Ruiz complained that respondent 

sexually harassed her and other District personnel, mocked students, and mishandled 

1 At hearing, complainant moved to amend the Accusation to conform to proof. 

Respondent objected and the ALJ overruled the objection. The First Amended 

Accusation was marked as Exhibit 10 and admitted for jurisdictional purposes. 

3 

 
nude photographs of a student. Her complaint alleged 13 separate incidents and 

identified dates and witnesses for most of the events. 

5. 

Based on Ms. Ruiz’s complaint, the District hired Marleen Sacks, a partner 

at an independent law firm, to investigate respondent’s conduct. In April and May 

2020, Ms. Sacks interviewed respondent, Ms. Ruiz, and eight other witnesses. She also 

reviewed relevant District policies, respondent’s letter resigning from the District, and 

email and text messages provided by respondent. Based thereon, Ms. Sacks prepared 

a Confidential Investigation Report. In her report, Ms. Sacks summarized the witness 

statements and concluded that each of Ms. Ruiz’s 13 allegations were sustained, either 

in whole or in part. She also noted additional findings, including that respondent 

inappropriately referred to Ms. Ruiz and Ms. Gutierrez as “girls,” writing, “The 

investigation found that this was inappropriate. They were both 29-year-old women. 

Referring to female employees as "girls" was demeaning and patronizing.” 

HEARING TESTIMONY 

Andrea Ruiz 

6. 

Ms. Ruiz has worked for the District for approximately 16 years, currently 

as the attendance clerk at RMS. In approximately August 2018, respondent started as 

the vice principal at RMS, and Mr. Hibbard started as the principal. From August 2018 

through March 2020, Ms. Ruiz interacted with respondent, Mr. Hibbard, and Mr. 

Hibbard’s secretary, Ms. Gutierrez, daily. Respondent and Mr. Hibbard created a casual 

working atmosphere in which the foursome was friendly and often joked with one 

another. They also shared a group text message chain in which they discussed work 

and personal topics. The group occasionally went to dinner together after work and 

one time vacationed in Lake Tahoe for a weekend. 

4 

7. 

Throughout their relationship, respondent engaged in behavior that 

caused Ms. Ruiz to feel uncomfortable. This included leaning too close to her at her 

desk and whispering compliments to her such as “what a great blouse,” “such a nice 

voice,” and “I can’t believe you’re single.” Respondent often flexed his muscles, 

sometimes while lifting his shirt, and commented on his physique and workouts. 

Respondent also commented on the looks of other District personnel, including 

Marissa Emmons and Mary La Rosa. Ms. Ruiz noted many specific instances of 

respondent’s behavior on a day-planning calendar at or near when they happened. 

8. 

On August 28, 2019, respondent told Ms. Ruiz that he was going to try to 

seduce Brooke Mercer, RMS’s campus supervisor, because it was her last year at the 

school. He also said it would be a challenge because Ms. Mercer’s husband was the 

only man she’d ever been with. 

9. 

On November 13, 2019, respondent asked Ms. Ruiz if she had ever seen a 

rabbit in the office. When she said she had not, respondent turned his pockets inside 

out and pulled them up to make rabbit ears. When he did so, his pants tightened and 

showed the outline of his crotch. He performed the “rabbit joke” twice more over the 

next two weeks. 

10.  On December 18, 2019, while Ms. Ruiz was bent over, respondent said, 

“you’re in my favorite position, stay put.” Patricia Verdone, a District employee, 

witnessed this. 

11.  On January 23, 2020, a student had an accident at school. Respondent 

then told Ms. Ruiz that he used to date a woman who became sexually aroused when 

he would wipe her after she urinated. 

5 

12.  On January 30, 2020, Ms. Ruiz told Ms. Gutierrez about a friend who had 

sent nude photos to another person. Respondent overheard the conversation and 

asked to see nude photos of Ms. Ruiz. When she declined, he asked Ms. Gutierrez if 

she had nude photos of Ms. Ruiz. 

13.  On February 6, 2020, Ms. Ruiz overheard respondent mimicking a woman 

moaning from his office. Stefani Sanchez, a librarian at RMS, also witnessed this. 

14.  On February 27, 2020, respondent called Ms. Ruiz into his office and told 

her a student at RMS had nude photos of another student. He explained he had used 

his phone to take a photo of the student’s phone screen showing the nude images. He 

then showed Ms. Ruiz the photos of the nude student and remarked, “all you girls are 

the same, you think no one will show others your photos and you girls keep sending 

them,” or substantially similar words to that effect. He pointed to the student’s genitals 

and asked, “what is that?” Ms. Ruiz responded, “that is the vagina of a student and you 

have no right showing these images to me!” Respondent never told Ms. Ruiz why he 

showed her the photos. Later that day, Ms. Ruiz saw respondent showing others the 

photos, including Brooke Mercer and Eric Peterson, the principal of an elementary 

school in the District. Shortly thereafter, Ms. Ruiz filed a police report because she 

believed respondent’s conduct was potentially a crime. 

15.  On March 10, 2020, respondent said to Ms. Ruiz, “wow Andrea let me 

take a look at that blouse you’re wearing.” Ms. Ruiz responded negatively, to which 

respondent replied, “wow you can’t compliment a girl nowadays.” 

16.  On March 13, 2020, respondent told Ms. Ruiz her performance evaluation 

was coming up and said, “everyone needs to be a team player.” He then looked at her 

and made a slurping sound and gesture. 

6 

17.  On March 16, 2020, Ms. Ruiz told respondent that the student 

attendance percentage that day was 69.8 percent. In response, respondent touched his 

chest and said, “69 is my favorite number.” 

18.  On March 17, 2020, respondent told Ms. Ruiz he had a rash on his thigh. 

He then showed her a photo of his leg, which was bare to his underwear line. 

19.  On unspecified dates, Ms. Ruiz saw respondent make fun of students 

with autism and other mental disabilities when their pants were inside out. She also 

saw him call a student named Diana “Dirty Diana” or just “dirty.” 

20.  Ms. Ruiz did not formally complain about respondent’s behavior because 

she did not believe he or Mr. Hibbard would take her concerns seriously. At times, she 

tried to demonstrate her discomfort with respondent’s behavior by not reacting or by 

shaking her head or using other disapproving body language. She acknowledged that 

she sometimes participated in inappropriate joking both at work and on the group 

text but explained she did so because she believed she had to “play along to get 

along.” She often felt she was “just trying to survive” and noted that the group text 

messages respondent introduced at hearing were small portions of their messages 

that did not include the full context. She also felt obligated and pressured to socialize 

with the group outside of work. Neither respondent nor Mr. Hibbard ever reprimanded 

or counseled Ms. Ruiz about her participation in the inappropriate comments. 

21.  On March 22, 2020, Ms. Ruiz submitted her written complaint to the 

District about respondent’s behavior. The District had recently asked employees to 

stay at home due to the COVID-19 pandemic, and the time away from the office gave 

Ms. Ruiz an opportunity to process respondent’s conduct. She does not stand to gain 

anything from her testimony, but rather wants “the right thing” to happen. 

7 

Brenda Smith 

22. 

Brenda Smith was the District superintendent at all times relevant to this 

matter. She was in charge of overall operations at five District schools, including RMS. 

Ms. Smith explained that the District maintains written policies governing topics such 

as nondiscrimination in employment, sexual harassment, professional standards, and 

family and student privacy rights. 

23.  Ms. Smith received Ms. Ruiz’s complaint on March 22, 2020. The 

following day, she placed respondent on administrative leave. She told him the reason 

for the leave but did not discuss any specifics with him. 

24.  On May 11, 2020, Ms. Smith met with respondent and discussed some of 

Ms. Ruiz’s specific allegations. During their meeting, respondent admitted that he told 

Ms. Ruiz, “you’re in my favorite position” while she was bent over. He also admitted 

that he used his pants pockets to pull his pants snug to his genitals. Ms. Smith was 

surprised that respondent admitted that behavior, because when she first read the 

complaint, she thought to herself, “there’s no way he did that.” 

25. 

After respondent’s admissions, Ms. Smith did not believe it was necessary 

to confirm the other details because she had heard enough to realize respondent 

could no longer serve as an administrator with the District. Respondent signed a 

resignation letter that day, to be effective June 30, 2020. Ms. Smith noted that 

respondent appeared remorseful and embarrassed during the meeting. 

26.  On June 10, 2020, Ms. Smith sent the Commission a letter reporting the 

complaint against respondent and the results of Ms. Sacks’s investigation. In her letter, 

8 

she noted that respondent’s conduct violated several District policies and “was at odds 

with what is expected of a dedicated professional.”2 

Patricia Verdone 

27. 

Patricia Verdone worked for the District as a resource teacher from June 

2014 through May 2020. She supported students during their individual education 

plan (IEP) meetings, many of which respondent attended. She believes respondent 

took inaccurate and undetailed notes during those meetings. 

28. 

Early in the 2018/2019 school year, respondent asked Ms. Verdone why 

the previous vice principal left RMS. Ms. Verdone told him it was because of tension 

with the prior principal, who was married to Ms. Smith. Respondent replied, “well I can 

see your point, why would she want to have her boss be fucking the guy she didn’t 

like?” Ms. Verdone found the comment inappropriate and uncomfortable. 

29. 

In October 2018, respondent asked Ms. Verdone if she was happy in her 

marriage. Ms. Verdone replied that all marriages had ups and downs, to which 

respondent offered, “if you’re ever unhappy, let me know and we could hook up at the 

beach.” 

30. 

Throughout the 2018/2019 school year, respondent made several similar 

comments to Ms. Verdone. On one occasion, he complimented her clothing and said, 

2 After the matter was submitted, the ALJ noticed one instance of a student’s 

name was unreacted within Ms. Smith’s letter, Exhibit 4, at page A133. Rather than 

reopen the record for the submission of a redacted Exhibit 4, the ALJ redacted the 

student’s name within the existing exhibit. 

9 

 
“Ooh, ooh, you get me excited when you wear those dresses.” Ms. Verdone told 

respondent not to talk to her like that, to which he laughed. 

31. 

Respondent also asked Ms. Verdone whether she went to the gym. He 

told her he did and lifted his shirt, rubbed his stomach, and said “look what the gym 

did for me.” He put his hands below his waistband while he did this. 

32.  On another occasion, respondent asked Ms. Verdone if she knew another 

individual with the same last name. Ms. Verdone confirmed it was her husband’s niece. 

Respondent then replied, “Man, she’s hot” and “she’s kinda skinny though.” He also 

said he “wanted to be with her” and asked if the woman’s husband was “gay or 

metrosexual.” 

33.  Ms. Verdone also witnessed other behavior from respondent that she 

found inappropriate. She saw him use his pockets to pull his pants snug against his 

groin. She witnessed him tell Ms. Ruiz “you’re in my favorite position” while she was 

bent over. He thrust his hips in the air from behind Ms. Ruiz while he said this. Ms. 

Verdone also saw respondent blow on Ms. Ruiz’s neck and ear. When Ms. Ruiz told 

him to stop, he laughed. 

34. 

In addition, respondent commented about the physique of another 

District employee, Marissa Emmons, specifically her legs. Ms. Verdone found this 

“perverted” because Ms. Emmons was respondent’s former student. Respondent called 

a mental clinician “hot” and asked Ms. Verdone to find out if she was single. 

Respondent pretended to spank the butt of a paraeducator who reached around him 

to get to a refrigerator. During an IEP meeting, respondent leered at Ms. Verdone’s 

breasts until she zipped her blouse higher. Respondent used profanity, claiming, “that 

student is fucking crazy.” 

10 

35.  Ms. Verdone reported most of these events to her union representative 

at or near the time they occurred. Her union representative discouraged her from 

complaining to the District for fear of retaliation. Ms. Verdone chose not to complain 

to the District because she did not trust Ms. Smith. 

Marissa Emmons 

36.  Marissa Emmons has been a school psychologist for the District for 

approximately six years. In that role, she provides social and emotional support to 

students. She serves students at multiple schools but her office is at RMS. 

37.  Ms. Emmons knew respondent and interacted with him during IEP 

meetings. She often found him to be immature and distracted during those meetings. 

Additionally, Ms. Emmons felt uncomfortable around respondent after a co-worker 

told her that he commented on her physical appearance. 

38.  On February 27, 2020, Ms. Emmons attended a training on the RMS 

campus. During a break, respondent approached her and Jameelah Cordano, a school 

counselor. He showed Ms. Emmons two nude photos of a student and said, “that’s 

what I’ve been dealing with all day.” Respondent displayed the photos such that Ms. 

Cordano could also see them. 

39.  Ms. Emmons was disturbed by respondent’s conduct and filed a police 

report the same day. Respondent did not show Ms. Emmons the photos in the context 

of providing student services. Rather, it was “more of a show-and-tell situation.” Ms. 

Emmons also noted that respondent had the images on his personal cell phone. 

11 

Cynthia Ruiz 

40. 

Cynthia Ruiz has worked as a paraeducator at RMS since 2014. She spoke 

with respondent approximately five to seven times about students. 

41.  On one occasion, she encountered respondent and they chatted briefly. 

During their discussion, respondent told her that if he could change something about 

his appearance, it would be his under-eye bags. He asked her what she would change 

and she mentioned her hair. Respondent then asked whether she would ever get 

breast implants. She found respondent’s comment inappropriate and it made her feel 

uncomfortable. 

Stefani Sanchez 

42. 

Stefani Sanchez has worked for the District since approximately 2015. 

From 2018 through 2020, she was a library media technician at RMS. She interacted 

with respondent occasionally. 

43.  Ms. Sanchez observed that respondent and Mr. Hibbard created a “frat 

house” feeling in the administrative office. Specifically, they often talked about 

drinking alcohol after work, asked whether substitute teachers or students’ mothers 

were hot or married, and played music with inappropriate language. She heard 

respondent refer to students as “dumbass” and “little shit.” She also observed 

respondent refer to himself as “the Asian Tom Cruise” and flex his chest and arm 

muscles. On one occasion, Ms. Sanchez was trying to unjam a copy machine and said, 

“this is hard,” to which respondent replied, “that’s what she said.” 

12 

Respondent’s Evidence 

RESPONDENT’S WRITTEN RESPONSES TO THE COMMISSION 

44. 

In November 2020, respondent submitted to the Commission two written 

responses to the allegations against him. One response addressed the allegations of 

sexual harassment, and the other addressed the allegations regarding his 

inappropriate handling of the nude student photos. 

45. 

Regarding sexual harassment, respondent denied most of Ms. Ruiz’s 

specific claims. He explained that she “embellished and flat out lied about situations 

and incidents that occurred at [RMS].” In his view, Ms. Ruiz “leads inappropriate 

conversations, has shown inappropriate pictures, and has been hostile towards” 

respondent, Mr. Hibbard, and Ms. Gutierrez. He suggested Ms. Ruiz falsely accused 

him of harassment to avoid employee discipline. He also explained that Ms. Ruiz came 

to him for advice about how to handle a sex video of her, stating Ms. Ruiz showed the 

video to Ms. Gutierrez. Generally, he alleged that Ms. Ruiz either created or fully 

participated in inappropriate conversations or conduct. He denied ever harassing her 

and noted that she never complained. To the contrary, Ms. Ruiz bought respondent a 

housewarming gift, visited his house to watch football with him and his children, and 

voluntarily attended several social events with him. 

46. 

Respondent also noted that he, Mr. Hibbard, and Ms. Gutierrez found Ms. 

Sacks’s investigation “stressful and unpleasant,” her approach to be “intimidating,” and 

her questions to be “leading in nature.” He did not address the allegations raised by 

any of the other individuals. He did explain, “In reference to my one off-colored joke, I 

do admit to a lapse in judgment with that comment, regardless if it was only intended 

for my Principal. I have learned from this incident and about myself. I want to assure 

13 

the committee that this will not happen again.” He did not specify which joke he 

meant. 

47. 

Regarding the nude student photos, respondent explained that when he 

learned the student’s classmate had the photos on her phone, he instructed the 

classmate to send them to his work computer for evidence. He noted that he looked at 

the two photos and the girl was “in a bra and underwear (not nude).” When the 

classmate was unable to email the photos, respondent “decided to use [his] work 

phone, during work hours, to take the two photographs off of her phone and send 

[them] directly to [his] work computer to be filed electronically.” 

48. 

Respondent then called Ms. Ruiz and Ms. Gutierrez into his office 

separately to show them the photos. He explained he wanted them to be in the office 

when he discussed the matter with the student in question. He also “wanted help 

correctly identifying the student.” Later that day, he showed the photos to the “site 

counselor” because “follow up counseling support is protocol for this type of 

situation.” He did not specify if he was referring to Ms. Emmons or Ms. Cordano. 

49. 

Thereafter, respondent and Mr. Hibbard were meeting in Mr. Hibbard’s 

office when Mr. Peterson, the principal at a District elementary school, knocked on the 

door. When he entered, respondent showed him the photos as well because 

respondent thought “additional administrative insights could be beneficial (basically, 

three administrative heads are better than two) and that he was the most senior 

administrator in our district.” Respondent did not explain why viewing the photos was 

important to Mr. Peterson’s insights or advice. 

50. 

Eventually, police officers arrived and attended the meeting with the 

student in question. Thereafter, respondent deleted the photos. He noted that the 

14 

police subsequently questioned him and searched his phone, but ultimately praised his 

conduct and found he engaged in no wrongdoing. 

51.  On February 4, 2021, respondent submitted another written response to 

the Commission. In it, he repeated that he “never intentionally sexually harassed any 

female.” He explained Ms. Ruiz filed the complaint against him because she “had a 

crush on [him] and that [he] did not respond favorably to her advances.” He again 

denied most of Ms. Ruiz’s allegations but acknowledged he “appropriately 

complimented on [sic] staff, faculty, students regarding items such as a new jacket, 

scarf, shoes, haircut but never followed it up with the comment [Ms. Ruiz] is alleging.” 

52. 

Regarding the “rabbit joke,” respondent explained it was in reference to a 

sticker of two rabbits mating. He explained, “that sticker triggered a past joke I had 

once heard, and I told it to [Mr. Hibbard]. I should have never made that wisecrack and 

did not realize [Ms. Ruiz] and [Ms. Gutierrez] heard it. I fully regret making that antic as 

it was inappropriate to all parties involved.” 

53. 

Regarding showing Ms. Ruiz a photo of his bare leg, respondent 

explained, “One evening, I had developed a rash on my inner knee and sent a picture 

of it to our office group text feed. I was looking for some treatment suggestions.” 

54. 

Respondent concluded his letter by noting: 

However, despite the fact that many of the allegations are 

overstated or completely false, in hindsight I should have 

known better than to engage in the office in casual 

personal talk banter with classified female employees. We 

did not maintain an appropriate professional distance. I 

clearly should have adhered to a "military type" standard 

15 

where officers may not fraternize with enlisted personnel. 

This is a very small, rural school district. Everybody knew 

each other. Instead of keeping a professional distance, we 

acted more like a close-knit group of social friends. The four 

of us became too familiar with each other and I believe this 

closeness led to the false allegations against me when 

things did not go the way that [Ms. Ruiz] wanted them to 

go. 

HEARING TESTIMONY 

Respondent 

55. 

At hearing, respondent reiterated the statements from his written letters 

to the Commission. He denied most of the allegations against him. He acknowledged 

that he pulled his pants pockets out to look like rabbit ears but said he did not mean 

to pull his pants close to his groin. He did this just one time and only to Mr. Hibbard, 

although he acknowledged Ms. Ruiz and Ms. Gutierrez “were in ocular view.” He 

believes they both laughed at the joke. 

56. 

Respondent acknowledged that Mr. Hibbard played a Michael Jackson 

song called “Dirty Diana” for a student named Diana, but explained it was not done 

mean-spiritedly. Rather, the student had won a contest to be a student-administrator 

for a day and playing a song with her name in it was a fun way to celebrate her. 

Respondent was aware of the song but not familiar with all the lyrics. He saw no 

reason that playing the song was inappropriate. 

57. 

Respondent also admitted he complimented Ms. Ruiz, Ms. Verdone, and 

others on their clothing and appearance, but never meant any harm by it. He 

16 

confirmed he referred to himself as “the Asian Tom Cruise.” In hindsight, he realizes 

that some of his jokes and bantering were inappropriate, but he believed his conduct 

was in line with the “general tomfoolery, bantering and silliness” of the administrative 

staff’s daily interactions. 

58. 

To demonstrate the workplace culture, respondent introduced several 

text messages and photographs that Ms. Ruiz sent to the group of four administrative 

staff. These messages included references to using alcohol and marijuana, insults 

about students and staff, and statements of positive feelings toward the group 

members, including respondent. Respondent had more of the group’s text messages 

but did not supply them all because he only shared what he thought was relevant or 

important. 

59. 

Regarding the nude photos of the student, respondent reiterated that 

the student was not fully nude because she wore underwear. He explained he used his 

own phone to photograph the images because he wanted the student’s classmate to 

delete the photos from her phone immediately. He considered his phone a “work 

phone” because he received a stipend from the District to defray the monthly service 

cost. He then showed Ms. Gutierrez the photos because he wanted her to sit in on the 

student meeting and wanted help identifying the student. Ms. Gutierrez did not know 

who the student was, but when respondent told her who the classmate said it was, Ms. 

Gutierrez confirmed that was her. 

60. 

A little while later, Ms. Gutierrez had to leave campus on an errand. 

Because she would be unavailable to attend the student meeting, respondent showed 

Ms. Ruiz the photos so she could attend instead. He also asked Ms. Ruiz for help 

separating the photos into two files. At hearing, he explained that his written response 

17 

incorrectly stated that he asked for Ms. Ruiz’s help identifying the student because 

some of the paragraphs were not in chronological order. 

61. 

Later, while looking for Mr. Hibbard on campus, respondent encountered 

Ms. Cordano and Ms. Emmons. He showed Ms. Cordano the photo because he 

anticipated she would eventually need to counsel the student. He was comfortable 

with Ms. Emmons seeing the photos as well because she was the school psychologist. 

After that, he showed Mr. Peterson the photos because he wanted advice about how 

to proceed. When asked at hearing whether he would do anything differently if faced 

with the same situation today, he said he would describe the photo to Ms. Cordano 

instead of showing her, but that is his only regret about his actions regarding the 

photos. 

62. 

In March or April 2022, respondent took courses in sexual harassment 

and workplace conduct so he could learn from his past behavior and improve in the 

future. He did not perceive his actions to be sexually harassing but took the classes 

because of the nature of the accusations against him. He waited almost two years to 

take the courses because the allegations shocked and overwhelmed him and he 

needed time to process the events. Additionally, he was busy because he started a new 

job as a fourth-grade teacher, his mother’s health was failing, and the complaint has 

been a “nightmare” that “devastated [his] life” and traumatized him. 

63. 

Through the courses, respondent learned “you can’t behave this way” in 

the workplace. He now believes it is best not to make any jokes or compliment anyone 

because “these things can go sideways.” He advises his friends who are still 

administrators not to joke or socialize with their coworkers. He no longer engages in 

“silly flexing” or comments about his physique because, even though he did not mean 

18 

those actions to be construed sexually, “you can never go wrong by being 

professional.” 

Jim Williamson 

64. 

In addition to taking sexual harassment courses, respondent began to 

see a licensed marriage and family therapist (LMFT) on May 13, 2022. His therapist, Jim 

Williamson, testified at hearing and submitted a letter of support. Dr. Williamson has 

been an LMFT for approximately 27 years and is also a former special education 

teacher. He has two master’s degrees and a Doctor of Education (Ed.D.) degree. He 

had weekly telephonic therapy sessions with respondent between May and November 

2022. In those sessions, they spent approximately 90 percent of their time talking 

about the allegations and 10 percent talking about respondent’s personal life. Dr. 

Williamson is aware of the general nature of the allegations but believes he “doesn’t 

need all the nitty gritty details to know it wasn’t right.” 

65. 

Through therapy, respondent worked on “boundary issues.” Dr. 

Williamson would pose hypothetical issues and respondent would practice “being 

sensitive to workplace issues.” Dr. Williamson found respondent to be remorseful, 

regretful, and receptive to change. He did not specify what respondent regrets. During 

cross-examination, he acknowledged that respondent did not admit to making 

inappropriate jokes or comments to coworkers. He also acknowledged that he does 

not know how respondent has changed in the workplace, if at all. 

Luke Hibbard 

66. 

Luke Hibbard met respondent at or near the time they both started 

working at RMS in approximately August 2018. Mr. Hibbard described the 

administrative office atmosphere as friendly, collegial and relaxed. In his opinion, he, 

19 

respondent, Ms. Ruiz, and Ms. Gutierrez were “professional when we needed to be, 

and friends at other moments.” The foursome socialized after work and Ms. Ruiz and 

Ms. Gutierrez sometimes babysat Mr. Hibbard’s children. Like respondent, Mr. Hibbard 

attributed much of the inappropriate comments and conduct to Ms. Ruiz. 

67.  Mr. Hibbard also wrote three letters of support for respondent, two of 

which were addressed to the Commission. In the first, he noted, “I am also aware that 

[respondent] is under review for alleged misconduct in the workplace and I feel 

compelled to write on his behalf. In our time together in a professional setting, 

[respondent] demonstrated on a daily basis that he possesses a management style 

that contributed to a strong relationship between our school site and students and 

their families.” 

68.  Mr. Hibbard also wrote in his first letter to the Commission, “I am familiar 

with the complaints made against [respondent] and can attest that they are 

overwhelmingly embellished or falsified.” He included similar statements in the second 

letter. At hearing, he confirmed he actually had no independent knowledge about 

whether nearly any of the allegations happened. Rather, he used that language to 

convey his sense of shock because the allegations were inconsistent with the behavior 

he observed from respondent. He acknowledged that, because he is also accused of 

participating in some of the inappropriate behavior, it is in his interest that the 

allegations be found unsubstantiated. 

69. 

Regarding the student photos, Mr. Hibbard agreed with respondent that 

the child was partially dressed and therefore “not nude.” In Mr. Hibbard’s opinion, it 

was “probably not necessary” for respondent to show the photos to others. Instead, he 

could have described them. He also believes the photos should not have been on 

20 

respondent’s cell phone. Mr. Hibbard was never issued a work phone and does not 

believe respondent was either. 

Jovita Gutierrez 

70. 

Jovita Gutierrez has worked for the District for approximately 12 years, 

currently as a secretary at the District office. She did not know respondent before he 

started at RMS but quickly grew to like him. She, respondent, Mr. Hibbard, and Ms. 

Ruiz would frequently joke at work and socialize outside of work. Ms. Ruiz often 

initiated their social interactions. All four of them participated in the playful and 

friendly banter and Ms. Ruiz never appeared offended. 

71.  Ms. Gutierrez confirmed that respondent flexed his muscles at work, 

discussed working out, and complimented women on their appearances. In her 

opinion, all four of them behaved similarly, and respondent meant no harm by his 

actions. She does not believe respondent ever crossed the line into sexual harassment. 

72.  Ms. Gutierrez also submitted two letters of support in which she 

characterized Ms. Ruiz’s allegations as “fabricated.” At hearing, she confirmed that 

respondent pulled his pants up to his groin by his pockets, shared a photo of his bare 

leg, complimented Ms. Ruiz’s clothing and appearance, and played “Dirty Diana” for a 

student. She denied that she ever saw a sex video or nude photos involving Ms. Ruiz 

and denied that respondent asked her to see nude photos of Ms. Ruiz. She 

acknowledged she had no independent knowledge of whether the other allegations 

occurred. 

73. 

Regarding the nude photos of the student, Ms. Gutierrez explained that 

she did not recognize the student. Instead, respondent already knew the identity of 

the student when he showed Ms. Gutierrez the photos. Once he told her the name, Ms. 

21 

Gutierrez then recognized her. She does not believe she needed to see the photos to 

participate in the meeting. She also does not believe others needed to see the photos. 

ADDITIONAL LETTERS OF SUPPORT 

74. 

Respondent introduced three additional letters of support from former 

coworkers. Mary La Rosa, a teacher and then interim principal at RMS, described him 

as student-centered, fair, kind, and empathetic. She praised his positive energy, 

“cutting jokes,” and playful behavior. She never experienced any negative remarks or 

actions by respondent and believes the allegations against him must be dishonest and 

unfounded. 

75. 

Jennifer Cornell is a counselor at Pitman High School in a different school 

district, where she formerly worked with respondent. She wrote a letter recommending 

him for employment in which she praised his responsibility, discipline, and respect. Her 

letter was written in February 2018, before the events raised in this case. 

76. 

Scott Young is the assistant principal at Pitman High School. He has 

known respondent for more than ten years. In his experience, respondent was caring 

and compassionate and “always maintained the highest levels of professionalism.” 

While at Pitman High School, respondent “did not have any issues with faculty 

members related to his behavior,” nor did he “act in a way that was considered 

unprofessional.” 

Analysis 

77. 

Complainant’s witnesses and respondent’s witnesses maintained 

respective versions of events that are largely incompatible with one another. Although 

there was some documentary evidence, most of the case focused on witness 

22 

testimony. As a result, witness credibility is central to the result. For the reasons 

explained below, complainant’s witnesses were more credible than respondent’s 

witnesses. 

78. 

First, none of complainant’s witnesses have any personal stake in the 

outcome of this case. In contrast, respondent, and to a lesser extent Mr. Hibbard, are 

biased by their own self-interest. (Evid. Code, § 780, subd. (f).) 

79. 

Second, each of complainant’s witnesses testified in a straightforward 

and forthright manner. In particular, Ms. Ruiz acknowledged her participation in the 

inappropriate workplace culture but credibly explained her reasons. Many of 

complainant’s witnesses related substantially similar accounts of respondent’s 

behavior. For example, Ms. Ruiz and Ms. Verdone both witnessed respondent tell Ms. 

Ruiz “you’re in my favorite position” while she was bent over. Multiple witnesses 

agreed that respondent used his pockets to pull his pants tightly against his groin. 

Multiple witnesses agreed that respondent commented on women’s clothing and 

physical appearance. Multiple witnesses agreed that respondent often flexed his 

muscles and talked about his physique. 

80.  On the other hand, respondent’s witnesses made many inconsistent 

statements. (Evid. Code, § 780, subd. (h).) For example, both Mr. Hibbard and Ms. 

Gutierrez wrote letters characterizing the accusations against respondent as false. Yet 

at hearing, both witnesses either confirmed some allegations or stated they had no 

independent knowledge of whether the balance of allegations happened. 

Consequently, their challenges to the allegations as false or fabricated were wholly 

without merit. 

23 

81. 

Similarly, many of respondent’s witnesses testified inconsistently with 

one another. For example, respondent said that Ms. Gutierrez saw either nude photos 

or a sex video involving Ms. Ruiz. However, Ms. Gutierrez denied that. Respondent said 

the phone he used to photograph the nude images of the student was his “work 

phone,” but Mr. Hibbard testified that neither he nor respondent was issued a work 

phone. Respondent testified that he showed Ms. Gutierrez the photos of the nude 

student in part so she could help identify the student. Ms. Gutierrez explained that she 

did not recognize the student until respondent affirmatively told her the student’s 

name. 

82. 

In addition, the documentary evidence that respondent presented was 

incomplete and unpersuasive. He attempted to demonstrate that Ms. Ruiz initiated, or 

at least voluntarily participated in, the immature and inappropriate joking culture of 

the office. However, he did so by selecting only certain portions of the group’s text 

messages that he deemed relevant or important. He had access to more messages, 

many of which would have provided context or presumably shown others’ comments, 

but he did not introduce those messages. “If weaker and less satisfactory evidence is 

offered when it was within the power of the party to produce stronger and more 

satisfactory evidence, the evidence offered should be viewed with distrust.” (Evid. 

Code, § 412.) 

83.  Moreover, respondent’s testimony was equivocal, evasive, and smug. He 

denied many of the allegations, but those he admitted he minimized. Specifically, he 

acknowledged pulling out his pockets to resemble rabbit ears but denied pulling up 

his pants to accentuate his groin. He struggled to explain the humor of the joke if it 

involved just the rabbit’s ears. He also acknowledged commenting on women’s 

clothing and appearances but said he did so amiably. He offered no explanation as to 

24 

why multiple coworkers, many of whom rarely interacted with one another, would all 

fabricate similar accusations against him with nearly identical details. 

84. 

Alternatively, respondent blamed Ms. Ruiz for instigating much of the 

inappropriate behavior. This was not credible. Respondent was the vice principal and, 

with Mr. Hibbard, was responsible for managing and, if necessary, disciplining Ms. 

Ruiz. However, despite his repeated claims that she initiated and participated in 

inappropriate workplace conduct, he never counseled or reprimanded her. This lack of 

discipline undermines respondent’s credibility. 

85. 

Furthermore, respondent claimed to have learned from his sexual 

harassment courses, but throughout the hearing her referred to Ms. Ruiz and Ms. 

Gutierrez as “the girls.” This is despite Ms. Sacks specifically noting in her investigation 

report that such conduct is demeaning and patronizing. 

86. 

Additionally, respondent continually insisted that the student was not 

fully nude in the photos he took and shared. Such insistence demonstrates that 

respondent does not fully appreciate the gravity of his actions. Whether the student 

was completely naked or had on her bra and underwear, she was a child who was 

undressed. Respondent not only took photos of her on his own cell phone, but then 

shared them with at least six other people, none of whom needed to see them to 

understand them. Indeed, the parties in this case conducted a four-day trial and 

examined 10 witnesses at length about these events, none of which was hindered by 

the absence of the actual photographs. By focusing on whether the student was fully 

or partially nude, respondent demonstrated that even now, he does not fully 

understand how inappropriate his actions were. 

25 

87. 

Respondent also noted that he has begun therapy with an LMFT. 

However, despite Dr. Williamson estimating that they have spent 90 percent of their 

sessions discussing the allegations in this case, he does not know the specifics. 

Moreover, he acknowledged on cross-examination that respondent did not admit to 

making inappropriate jokes or comments to coworkers and that he does not know 

whether respondent’s workplace behavior has changed. For those reasons, Dr. 

Williamson’s testimony not only failed to prove respondent’s rehabilitation, it 

affirmatively demonstrated the opposite. 

88. 

Finally, respondent submitted letters of support from former colleagues. 

However, none of the authors stated that they are aware of the specific allegations 

against respondent. As such, the letters are entitled to little weight with regard to the 

authors’ assessment of respondent’s character. (Seide v. Committee of Bar Examiners 

of the State Bar of California (1989) 49 Cal.3d 933, 940 [“If the character witnesses were 

not aware of the extent or seriousness of petitioner’s criminal activities, their 

evaluation of his character carry less weight”].) 

Morrison Factors 

89. 

In Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, the California 

Supreme Court concluded that a teaching credential cannot be disciplined for immoral 

conduct, unprofessional conduct, or conduct involving moral turpitude “unless that 

conduct indicates that the [educator] is unfit to teach.” (Id. at p. 229.) The Court 

outlined factors for consideration when determining whether an educator’s conduct 

demonstrates unfitness to teach, and the Commission adopted those factors by 

enacting California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80302. 

26 

LIKELIHOOD OF ADVERSE EFFECT ON STUDENT OR FELLOW TEACHERS 

90. 

“A teacher [. . .] in the public school system is regarded by the public and 

pupils in the light of an exemplar, whose words and actions are likely to be followed 

by the children coming under [his] care and protection.” (Bd. of Education v. Swan 

(1953) 41 Cal.2d 546, 552.) This is also true of administrators such as vice principals, 

perhaps even more so. Respondent’s repeated sexual harassment of his subordinates 

and coworkers reflects poorly on him individually, and on teachers and administrators 

generally. Moreover, respondent’s handling of the nude student photos demonstrates 

a severe lack of sound judgment. He not only failed to safeguard the student’s privacy, 

but he actively violated it repeatedly and unnecessarily. 

91. 

Because students are impressionable and may try to emulate the adults 

in their lives, including teachers and administrators, it is essential that an educator’s 

behavior be beyond reproach. Respondent’s conduct demonstrated behavior inimical 

to the wellbeing of students and portrayed both him and the teaching profession 

negatively. 

TYPE OF CREDENTIALS HELD 

92. 

Respondent’s credentials authorize him to teach students and act as an 

administrator in a variety of school settings to children of all ages. Therefore, it is even 

more imperative that he exemplify the type of behavior society wants emulated by 

students and possess sound judgment. Respondent’s conduct raises concerns over 

whether he is an appropriate role model for the students in his care. 

27 

EXTENUATING OR AGGRAVATING CIRCUMSTANCES 

93.  Neither the Education Code nor the regulations adopted by the 

Commission specify what constitutes “extenuating circumstances.” However, the 

California Code of Regulations defines “mitigating factor” as “an event or circumstance 

which demonstrates that the public, schoolchildren and the profession would be 

adequately protected by a more lenient degree of adverse action or no adverse action 

whatsoever.” (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80300, subd. (m).) The Commission’s regulations 

also define “aggravating factor” as “an event or circumstance which demonstrates that 

a greater degree of adverse action for an act of professional misconduct is needed to 

adequately protect the public, schoolchildren or the profession.” (Id. at § 80300, subd. 

(b).) 

94. 

The repeated nature of respondent’s conduct demonstrates a pattern of 

misconduct involving both sexual harassment and violation of student privacy. Taken 

together, respondent’s actions demonstrate the need for a greater degree of adverse 

action to ensure public protection. As explained above, respondent’s evidence of 

mitigation in the form of his sexual harassment classes and therapy was not 

persuasive. 

PRAISEWORTHINESS OR BLAMEWORTHINESS OF THE MOTIVES RESULTING IN 

THE MISCONDUCT 

95. 

Respondent bears the sole blame for his conduct. Although respondent 

testified that he meant his remarks about women’s clothing and physiques to be 

complimentary, he did not prove that his conduct was praiseworthy. To the contrary, 

complainant’s witnesses credibly explained that they felt universally uncomfortable 

from respondent’s comments. 

28 

LIKELIHOOD OF RECURRENCE 

96. 

Respondent lacks insight into what caused his sexually harassing 

conduct. Similarly, he testified that the only thing he regrets about the way he handled 

the nude student photos was that he showed them to Ms. Cordano. As a result, his 

statements that he would avoid similar conduct in the future are unconvincing. 

Without understanding the reasons for his past misconduct, respondent cannot 

demonstrate he is unlikely to engage in similar misconduct in the future. 

PUBLICITY OR NOTORIETY OF MISCONDUCT 

97.  Neither party presented evidence about whether respondent’s 

misconduct was publicized. Nevertheless, his actions involved multiple teachers and 

students and led to a police investigation. 

Conclusion 

98. 

As discussed above, the persuasive evidence established that respondent 

engaged in each act of misconduct alleged in the First Amended Accusation. 

Complainant therefore established by clear and convincing evidence that respondent 

engaged in unprofessional conduct, evident unfitness for service, immoral conduct, 

moral turpitude, and persistent defiance of and refusal to obey the laws regulating the 

duties of persons service in the public school system. When considering the relevant 

Morrison factors, respondent’s conduct demonstrated his unfitness to teach for the 

reasons explained in Factual Findings 77 through 97. Therefore, cause exists to 

discipline his credentials. In light of the serious and repeated nature of his conduct, 

respondent’s credentials should be revoked. 

29 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Complainant bears the burden of proving the existence of grounds for 

disciplining respondent’s credentials and must do so by clear and convincing evidence 

to a reasonable certainty. (Daniels v. Dept. of Motor Vehicles (1983) 33 Cal.3d 532, 536 

[“When an administrative agency initiates an action to suspend or revoke a license, the 

burden of proving the facts necessary to support the action rests with the agency 

making the allegation”]; Gardener v. Comm’n. on Professional Competence (1985) 164 

Cal.App.3d 1036, 1039-1040 [recognizing that the clear and convincing evidence 

standard applies to proceedings to discipline a teacher’s credential, whereas the lesser 

preponderance of the evidence standard applies to proceedings to dismiss a teacher 

from particular employment].) “The courts have defined clear and convincing evidence 

as evidence which is so clear as to leave no substantial doubt and as sufficiently strong 

to command the unhesitating assent of every reasonable mind. [Citations.] It has been 

said that a preponderance calls for probability, while clear and convincing proof 

demands a high probability [citations].” (In re Terry D. (1978) 83 Cal.App.3d 890, 899; 

italics original.) 

2. 

The California Supreme Court has recognized that the terms “immoral 

conduct” and “unprofessional conduct” substantially overlap one another and that 

conduct which constitutes one often includes the other. (See, Morrison v. State Bd. of 

Education, supra, 1 Cal.3d 214, 221, fn. 9.) “Unprofessional conduct” includes “‘that 

which violates the rules of ethical code of a profession or such conduct which is 

unbecoming a member of a profession in good standing.’” (Bd. of Education v. Swan, 

supra, 41 Cal.2d at p. 553; quoting, 66 Corpus Juris, p. 55.) In describing what 

constitutes “immoral conduct” within the context of the Education Code, the court in 

30 

Board of Education of San Francisco Unified School District v. Weiland (1960) 179 

Cal.App.2d 808, said:  

In Orloff v. Los Angeles Turf Club, 36 Cal.2d 734, at page 

740 [227 P.2d 449], the Supreme Court quotes with 

approval the following statement from Words and Phrases, 

permanent edition, volume 20, pages 159-160: “The term 

‘immoral’ has been defined generally as that which is hostile 

to the welfare of the general public and contrary to good 

morals. Immorality has not been confined to sexual matters, 

but includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or 

indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; 

or as willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral 

indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the 

community, and as an inconsiderate attitude toward good 

order and the public welfare.” 

(Id., at p. 811.) 

3. 

The court in San Diego Unified School District v. Commission on 

Professional Competence (2011) 194 Cal.App.4th 1454, said the following about the 

definition of immoral or unprofessional conduct: 

Moreover, the definition of immoral or unprofessional 

conduct must be considered in conjunction with the unique 

position of public school teachers, upon whom are imposed 

“responsibilities and limitations on freedom of action which 

do not exist in regard to other callings.” [Citation.] 

31 

(Id., at p. 1466.) 

4. 

And the following has been said about the analysis for determining 

whether particular conduct constitutes sufficient cause for taking adverse action 

against a credential: 

Goldsmith v. Board of Education, 66 Cal.App. 157, 168 [225 

P. 783], quoted in Board of Education v. Swan, 41 Cal.2d 

546, 553-554 [261 P.2d 261], found that the standards for 

judging the propriety of a teacher’s conduct, and the extent 

to which that conduct may be the basis for the revocation 

of a credential, involves many aspects. “ . . . the teacher is 

entrusted with the custody of children and their high 

preparation for useful life. His habits, his speech, his good 

name, his cleanliness, the wisdom and propriety of his 

unofficial utterances, his associations, all are involved. His 

ability to inspire children and to govern them, his power as 

a teacher, and the character for which he stands are matters 

of major concern in a teacher’s selection and retention.” 

(Moser v. State Bd. of Education (1972) 22 Cal.App.3d 988, 991.) 

5. 

The Commission may discipline a credential based on the holder’s 

unprofessional conduct. (Ed. Code, § 44421.) As discussed in Factual Findings 77 

through 98, complainant established by clear and convincing evidence that 

respondent engaged in unprofessional conduct when he sexually harassed his 

coworkers and violated a student’s privacy by inappropriately handling nude photos of 

32 

her. On that basis, cause exists to discipline respondent’s credentials pursuant to 

Education Code section 44421. 

6. 

The Commission may discipline a credential based on the holder’s 

evident unfitness for service. (Ed. Code, § 44421.) As discussed in Factual Findings 77 

through 98, complainant established by clear and convincing evidence that 

respondent’s sexual harassment of his coworkers and violation of a student’s privacy 

through inappropriately handling nude photos of her demonstrated his evident 

unfitness for service. On that basis, cause exists to discipline respondent’s credentials 

pursuant to Education Code section 44421. 

7. 

The Commission may discipline a credential based on the holder’s 

immoral conduct. (Ed. Code, § 44421.) As discussed in Factual Findings 77 through 98, 

complainant established by clear and convincing evidence that respondent engaged in 

unprofessional conduct when he sexually harassed his coworkers and violated a 

student’s privacy by inappropriately handling nude photos of her. On that basis, cause 

exists to discipline his credentials pursuant to Education Code section 44421. 

8. 

The Commission may discipline a credential “for any cause that would 

have warranted the denial of an application for a credential or the renewal thereof.” 

(Ed. Code, § 44421.) An application for a credential may be denied if the applicant “has 

committed any act involving moral turpitude.” (Ed. Code, § 44345, subd. (e).) As 

discussed in Factual Findings 77 through 98, complainant established by clear and 

convincing evidence that respondent committed acts involving moral turpitude when 

he sexually harassed his coworkers and violated a student’s privacy by inappropriately 

handling nude photos of her. On that basis, cause exists to discipline his credentials 

pursuant to Education Code section 44421, as that statute relates to Education Code 

section 44345, subdivision (e). 

33 

9. 

The Commission may discipline a credential based on the holder’s 

“persistent defiance of, and refusal to obey, the laws regulating the duties of persons 

serving in the public school system.” (Ed. Code, § 44421.) As discussed in Factual 

Findings 77 through 98, complainant established by clear and convincing evidence 

that respondent persistently defied and refused to obey the laws regulating the duties 

of those serving in public schools when he sexually harassed his coworkers and 

violated a student’s privacy by inappropriately handling nude photos of her. On that 

basis, cause exists to discipline his credentials pursuant to Education Code section 

44421. 

10. 

Cause exists to discipline respondent’s credentials for the reasons 

explained in Legal Conclusions 5 through 9, individually and collectively. When all the 

evidence is considered, respondent did not produce sufficient evidence of his 

continued fitness to perform the duties authorized under his credentials, even on a 

probationary basis. Therefore, his credentials should be revoked. 

ORDER 

The Clear Multiple Subject Teaching Credential, Clear Administrative Services 

Credential, Activity Supervisor Clearance Credential, and all other credentials, 

certificates, and authorizations issued to respondent by the Commission are REVOKED.

DATE: January 6, 2023

SEAN GAVIN 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings 

34 

Sean Gavin (Jan 6, 2023 09:06 PST) 
 
