BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Statement of Issues Against: 

VIRGINIA MARY VELASQUEZ, Respondent. 

Agency Case No. 2-114443888 

OAH No. 2022010206 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Administrative Law Judge Holly M. Baldwin, State of California, Office of 

Administrative Hearings, heard this matter on March 7, 2022, by videoconference.

Deputy Attorney General Amber N. Wipfler represented complainant Mary Vixie 

Sandy, Ed.D., Executive Director of the Commission on Teacher Credentialing. 

Respondent Virginia Mary Velasquez represented herself.

The record closed and the matter was submitted for decision on March 7, 2022. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Background and Procedural History 

1. 

The California Commission on Teacher Credentialing (Commission) is 

responsible for the issuance of teaching credentials, including teaching permits.

2.

Respondent Virginia Mary Velasquez applied for a 30-Day Substitute 

Teaching Permit. The application was signed by respondent on January 31, 2020, and 

received by the Commission on February 24, 2020. 

3. 

Respondent’s application was considered by the Committee of 

Credentials at its July 21-23, 2021 meeting. On July 30, 2021, the Commission notified 

respondent of the decision by the Committee of Credentials that found probable 

cause to recommend denial of the application. 

4. 

Respondent requested an administrative hearing. 

5. 

Mary Vixie Sandy, Ed.D., signed the Statement of Issues on December 1, 

2021, in her capacity as the Executive Director of the Commission, seeking to deny 

respondent’s application based on a criminal conviction involving acts of moral 

turpitude. 

Conviction and Underlying Conduct 

6. 

On December 11, 2017, respondent was convicted in the Superior Court 

of California, County of Alameda, on a plea of no contest, of felony forgery, in violation 

of Penal Code section 470, subdivision (d). Imposition of sentence was suspended, and 

respondent was placed on formal probation for three years, on terms and conditions 

including serving 30 days via an electronic monitoring program in lieu of jail time, 

attending classes and drug testing as directed by her probation officer, not bidding on 

public contracts, and paying fines and fees.

7.

The facts of the underlying offense are that in early 2013, respondent 

submitted falsified documents to Alameda County in support of her application for the

Small Local Emerging Business (SLEB) program. The program requires that applicants 

2

have a fixed office with a street address in Alameda County, for at least six months 

prior to certification. Respondent presented six rent checks and a lease agreement to 

the county as proof that her business had an office on 14th Street in Oakland from 

June through November 2012, but those documents were falsified. Respondent’s 

business was granted SLEB certification in April 2013, which entitled her to preferential 

bidding status on county contracts. Respondent received a $17.5 million contract. The 

county discovered in 2017 that the checks from respondent’s business had been 

falsified, leading to her prosecution and conviction. 

8. 

On March 3, 2020, respondent was granted early termination of 

probation and her conviction was reduced to a misdemeanor and dismissed pursuant 

to Penal Code sections 17, subdivision (b) and 1203.4 (often called “expungement”). 

Respondent’s Evidence 

9. 

Respondent operated her former company, TeamPersona, for 25 years. 

The company provided temporary staffing services, especially during election seasons, 

and she did business with Alameda County for a number of years.

10.

Respondent testified that she was given additional points in the bidding 

process for having an office located in Oakland, but she believes that her business 

would have won the contract anyway. Respondent contends that nobody suffered as a 

result of her conduct.

11.

Respondent admits that falsified checks were submitted to show her 

business had a local office, but she maintains that the forgery and submission of the 

falsified documents were done by her staff without her knowledge. In her testimony, 

she blamed her former accountant for misappropriating funds.

3

12.

Respondent was rarely in the office during 2012, due to her own illness 

and her family caretaking responsibilities. It was her practice to let her assistant send 

emails under her signature without reviewing the attachments, because she was 

overwhelmed. Respondent admitted that she lacked oversight of her business 

operations due to her personal issues, but that as CEO it was her responsibility to 

know where her company’s offices were located. 

13. 

Respondent stated that she pleaded no contest to the forgery charge 

because she could not afford to pay her attorney to fight the criminal case. She insists 

that she had no personal knowledge of the wrongdoing, but also maintains that her 

plea constitutes an acceptance of responsibility for her company’s misconduct.

14. 

Respondent has no other criminal record.

15. 

After the conviction, respondent closed down her business. 

16. 

Respondent stated that she has long wanted to be a teacher. Respondent 

considers herself to be a person of integrity and not a danger to children. She has 

been a scout leader for Girl Scout, Cub Scout, and Girl BSA Scout troops. 

17. 

Respondent has been working as a private school teacher since October 

2021. She teaches math, United States history, and civics in a middle/high school for 

children with special needs, providing one-on-one instruction. 

18. 

Respondent submitted two letters of support. 

(a) 

Porfirio Alejandro Diaz wrote a letter dated December 8, 2020. He has 

known respondent for nearly 40 years, and admires her integrity, selflessness, and 

resilience. He described the challenges respondent faced caring for family members 

4

and providing for her family, and her volunteer activities. He hopes respondent can 

“put her legal troubles behind her.” 

(b)  Mayra Bautista wrote a letter dated November 22, 2019. She had known 

respondent for more than 7 years at that time. Bautista and respondent were both 

active in the Hispanic Chamber of Commerce in Contra Costa County. Bautista 

described respondent as responsible, reliable, generous. The letter does not reflect 

knowledge of respondent’s conviction. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1. 

The standard of proof applied in this proceeding is a preponderance of 

the evidence and the burden is on respondent to show she is qualified for the 

credential she seeks to obtain. (

. 

(1959) 52 Cal.2d 238; Gov. Code, § 11504; Evid. Code, §§ 115, 500.) 

2. 

Education Code section 44345, subdivision (e), authorizes the 

Commission to deny an application for a credential if an individual has committed any 

act involving moral turpitude. Respondent’s forgery conviction and the underlying 

conduct are acts of moral turpitude and provide cause for denial of her application. 

Cause for denial of the application was established in light of the matters set forth in 

Factual Findings 6 and 7.

3.

California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80302, subdivision (a), sets 

forth the factors to be used in determining the relationship between an applicant’s 

misconduct and fitness to perform the duties of a credential, which are sometimes 

referred to as the 

 factors. (See 

 (1969) 

1 Cal.3d 214, 229-230.) These factors include, but are not limited to: the likelihood that 

5

the conduct may have adversely affected students, teachers, or the educational 

community, and the degree of the adversity; the proximity or remoteness in time of 

the conduct; the type of credential sought; extenuating or aggravating circumstances 

surrounding the conduct; praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the applicant’s 

motives; likelihood of recurrence; the extent to which disciplinary action may inflict an 

adverse impact or chilling effect upon constitutional rights; and the publicity or 

notoriety of the conduct. Only the most pertinent 

factors need be considered 

in a particular case. (

(1993) 16 Cal.App.4th 1766, 1777.) 

4. 

California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80300, subdivision (b), sets 

forth aggravating factors, including that the misconduct evidences multiple acts of 

wrongdoing or a pattern of misconduct, the misconduct was surrounded by or 

followed by bad faith or dishonesty, and the individual demonstrated indifference 

towards the consequences of the misconduct.

5.

California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80300, subdivision (m), 

sets forth mitigating factors including: absence of a prior record of adverse action over 

many years of educational service coupled with misconduct that is not deemed most 

serious; lack of harm to the object of the misconduct; emotional or physical difficulties 

suffered by the individual; a demonstration of good character attested to by 

references who are aware of the extent of the misconduct; actions taken by the 

individual demonstrating remorse and recognition of the misconduct; and the nature 

and extent of subsequent rehabilitation.

6.

In this case, respondent’s conduct occurred nearly 10 years ago, although 

it came to light and resulted in a conviction more recently. The misconduct was a 

sophisticated forgery scheme perpetrated against the county, to obtain preferential 

6

bidding status. Respondent’s contention that nobody was harmed is unpersuasive. The 

motives involved in the misconduct are blameworthy, not praiseworthy.

Of greatest concern is that respondent has consistently minimized the severity 

of her wrongdoing and failed to accept responsibility. She stated she had no 

knowledge of the forgery, and that she only pleaded no contest because she lacked 

the funds to go to trial, but the offense to which she pleaded requires the intent to 

defraud. Fully acknowledging the wrongfulness of one’s actions is an essential step 

toward rehabilitation. (

(1989) 49 Cal.3d 933, 940.) 

Respondent may not attempt to impeach or collaterally attack her conviction under 

the guise of explaining the circumstances surrounding her offense and plea. (

(1980) 28 Cal.3d 440, 449.) Respondent’s lack of insight and indifference to the 

consequences of her misconduct, the dishonesty surrounding the offense, and the 

multiple falsified documents are all additional aggravating factors.

Given all of the above circumstances, it would be against the public interest to 

grant respondent’s application.

ORDER

Respondent Virginia Mary Velasquez’s application for a 30-Day Substitute 

Teaching Permit is denied.

DATE:

HOLLY M. BALDWIN

Administrative Law Judge

Office of Administrative Hearings

7

