BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Accusation Against: 

RAUL MARTIN, Respondent 

Case No. 2-196071450 

OAH No. 2022050526 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Timothy J. Aspinwall, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative 

Hearings (OAH), State of California, heard this matter by videoconference on July 25 

and 26, and August 1, 2022, from Sacramento, California.

Jeff Stone, Deputy Attorney General, represented complainant Mary Vixie 

Sandy, Ed.D. (complainant), Executive Director of the California Commission on 

Teacher Credentialing (CTC or Commission). 

Joshua F. Richtel, Attorney at Law, represented Raul Martin (respondent) who 

was present. 

Evidence was received, the record closed, and the matter submitted for decision 

on August 1, 2022.

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Background and Jurisdictional Matters 

1.

On May 5, 2003, the Commission issued a Certificate of Clearance to 

respondent, valid until June 1, 2008. On May 14, 2004, the Commission issued a 

Preliminary Single Subject Teaching Credential to respondent, valid until June 1, 2009. 

On March 26, 2009, the Commission issued a Clear Single Subject Teaching Credential 

to respondent, which was in full force and effect at all times relevant to the charges, 

and will expire on April 1, 2024, unless renewed or revoked.

2. 

On February 15, 2022, complainant, acting in her official capacity, signed 

and thereafter filed the accusation in this matter. Complainant seeks to revoke all 

credentials, certificates, and authorizations issued to respondent, based on allegations 

that he engaged in conduct with high school students that was unprofessional, 

immoral, and involved moral turpitude, and that his conduct displayed evident 

unfitness for service. Respondent timely filed a notice of defense, and this hearing 

followed. 

Complainant’s Evidence 

TESTIMONY OF STEPHANIE GIANNINI

3. 

Stephanie Giannini is employed as a special investigator for the 

Commission. She conducted an investigation of this matter, including interviewing 

witnesses and gathering documents and written statements. She testified regarding 

her investigation in this matter, including interviews of the witnesses AL, EA, and AS, 

whose testimony is summarized below. 

2 

TESTIMONY AND WRITTEN STATEMENT OF AL 

4.

AL is a young woman who attended Central High School East (Central 

High East) in Fresno during 2013 through 2017. During her sophomore year, she was a 

student in respondent’s world history class. She was also in respondent’s class during 

her junior year and during summer school after her junior year. During her senior year, 

she served in respondent’s class as a teacher’s assistant (TA). 

5. 

During her sophomore year, AL thought respondent was a friendly 

teacher. He would sometimes touch students on their shoulders, including hers. 

During her junior year, respondent started sending her messages on Instagram and 

Snapchat. Respondent would confirm his identity during electronic communications by 

asking who had sent her the message. 

6. 

During her junior year, a male student asked AL if respondent made her 

feel uncomfortable. The male student told AL to “lure” respondent. AL did not initially 

agree to participate, then decided to send messages to respondent to see how he 

responded. 

7. 

During AL’s junior year, on March 31, 2016, late at night, respondent sent 

AL a Snapchat voice recording in which he said her middle name. AL had asked him to 

do so a few moments earlier so she could confirm it was respondent. AL recognized 

respondent’s voice on the recording. Respondent sent the voice recording on a 

Snapchat account with the username or “handle,” “Cerilloramirez9.” One of AL’s female 

friends was present with her and took a picture of the Snapchat message on her 

phone. Respondent also used other Snapchat account handles, including “Tin3535” 

and “Rawool15.”

3 

8. 

Approximately one hour after receiving respondent’s voice recording on 

Snapchat, AL received a photograph from the “Cerrilloramirez9” Snapchat handle. The 

photograph was too dark for AL to see, so she asked the sender to send it again. 

Shortly thereafter, she received a photograph of a penis through the same Snapchat 

account. The picture appeared for approximately three seconds. A Snapchat sender 

can control how long a picture will appear to the recipient before going blank. 

9. 

AL did not save or hold the picture in place because Snapchat notifies a 

sender if the recipient saves or holds a picture, and AL did not want that notice sent to 

respondent. AL’s friend who had photographed the earlier Snapchat message with the 

voice message was also present. AL’s friend did not take a picture of it. 

10. 

AL considered making a complaint with the school about respondent, but 

she did not want to deal with what she expected to be the repercussions of doing so. 

She knew of another female student who had made a complaint against a teacher and 

observed that the other student had experienced a lot of social repercussions 

including rumors among students. AL did not want to go through something similar. 

11. 

AL enrolled in and attended summer school in respondent’s geography 

class after this incident. She felt “kind of weird” about going to his class, but other 

students were present and summer school is a fairly short period of time. 

12. 

Respondent continued to contact AL through social media during the 

summer school session, though not while in class. He put his hand on her shoulder 

during summer school class at least five times. Respondent gave AL an “A” in the class, 

which AL feels she “definitely did not deserve” because she did not understand the 

material. 

4 

13. 

During her senior year, AL served as a TA in respondent’s class. She 

applied for the position because she knew respondent would accept her as his TA. She 

was worried in the back of her mind about working for respondent, but felt she was 

safe because they would be in class in front of other students. 

14. 

During the time AL was serving as respondent’s TA, he started hugging 

her “hello and goodbye.” Respondent would sometimes put his hand on her lower 

back during a hug. This would give AL “a sinking feeling” in her stomach. 

15. 

Also during the time AL was serving as respondent’s TA, he would 

sometimes overhear AL and her friends talking about money issues, including that AL 

needed $30 to pay the Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV) to re-take a test. 

Respondent, on his own initiative, gave her the $30 so she could pay the DMV. 

16.  On one occasion while working as a TA, AL was alone in the classroom 

with respondent for a short time. On their way out of the classroom, respondent 

hugged AL and, while doing so, grabbed her buttock with his right hand. Shortly 

afterward, respondent sent a text message to AL stating “that felt nice.” AL does not 

remember whether she responded to the text message. AL did not say anything to 

anyone about the incident because she did not want to draw attention to herself. 

17.

During AL’s senior year in high school, respondent sent her a Snapchat 

message that they could eat lunch together at his house when his wife was not 

present. Respondent told AL that he and his wife were not having sex, and he was 

sexually frustrated. It seemed to AL that respondent wanted to have a physical 

relationship with AL. 

18. 

After AL graduated from high school, respondent frequently contacted 

her on social media. One night respondent contacted AL by social media and asked 

5 

her what she was doing. AL told respondent she was at Save Mart running an errand 

for her mother. Shortly thereafter, respondent arrived in the Save Mart parking lot. 

Even though AL had a “sinking feeling” in her stomach, she made conversation with 

respondent. It ended when respondent said he wanted to kiss her, then kissed her on 

the lips. AL did not reciprocate. She was “shocked” by respondent’s behavior. She went 

to her car and started crying. She drove to her mother’s house and composed herself 

before going inside.1 

19. 

AL was motivated to come forward by the fact that respondent had 

kissed her in the parking lot, and that she had younger sisters and female cousins who 

would be attending the high school where respondent was then teaching. 

20. 

The first authority figure AL contacted was a “cop” at Walmart. He was an 

elderly man who “looked easy to talk to.” AL explained her situation, and he gave her a 

law enforcement phone number to call. She called the number, and two police officers 

came to her apartment later that day and took a statement from her. AL also posted a 

public message on Twitter stating her account of how respondent had behaved toward 

her during her high school years. 

21. 

AL was interviewed at different times by police officers and the 

Commission investigator. AL did not tell either the police officers or Commission 

investigator that respondent had kissed her in the Save Mart parking lot. AL felt it was 

1 This account is included only to explain why AL reported respondent’s 

conduct. It is not alleged in the accusation, nor is it considered as a basis for discipline.

6 

 
important to tell what respondent did while she was a student, and not what he did 

after she had graduated and had reached adulthood. 

TESTIMONY OF EA 

22. 

EA is a young woman who attended Central High East. She was in 

respondent’s history class during her junior year (2016–17) and served as respondent’s 

TA during her senior year (2017–18). When she was in respondent’s history class, she 

noticed that respondent was more friendly with the girls than with the boys. AL was 

respondent’s TA while EA was a junior in his history class. 

23. 

During her junior year, respondent touched her shoulders with his hands 

when he came near during class. At first, it seemed like he was a “cool teacher” and 

that she was a “cool student.” 

24. 

EA had social media accounts on Twitter, Snapchat, and Instagram. A 

couple of months into her junior year, EA noticed that respondent “added” her and 

started following her on Twitter. Respondent sent her a message on Twitter and 

introduced himself by saying “hola chica,” which translated from Spanish to English 

means “hello girl.” Respondent also started to follow EA on Snapchat, which allows a 

person to send and post written messages and pictures. Respondent’s Twitter handle

was “Raulgol_[a number].” He used the “TinTin35” Snapchat handle.

25.  None of respondent’s social media communications with EA were school 

related. For example, respondent asked EA for her personal telephone number on 

Snapchat. She responded by giving him her telephone number but does “not know 

why” she did so. He also commented on pictures she had posted on Instagram, by 

posting a picture of a face with hearts in place of the eyes.

7 

26. 

Respondent messaged EA on Snapchat in the late-night hours. On one 

occasion around the midpoint of her junior year, at approximately 10:00 or 11:00 p.m., 

EA received a Snapchat from the “TinTin35” handle with a photograph of a penis and a 

written message that said, “you make me hard.” EA sent a written response asking, 

“where’s your wife?” The response she received from the “TinTin35” handle was, “she’s 

sleeping and would not want to anyway.” To EA’s knowledge, respondent changed his 

Snapchat handle twice after this incident. 

27. 

EA cannot recall whether the Snapchat picture of the penis was on a 

timer. She viewed the picture for several seconds and did not save it. She was 

embarrassed to have it on her phone. EA felt disgusted and confused. She wondered 

why respondent sent her the picture because she had never done anything to suggest 

she wanted anything like this. 

28. 

Respondent had previously told EA in Snapchat conversations that his 

marriage was not so good and that his wife “would not please him in certain ways.” 

They also communicated about this a few times through cell phone text messages, but 

respondent told EA he did not want to communicate with text messages because they 

went through his daughter’s iPad, and he did not want his wife to see the messages. 

29. 

All the Snapchat text messages from respondent would disappear after 

she exited the conversation. She did not save them because she did not want 

respondent to see that she was saving the messages. She was still his student and was 

concerned he might think she was saving them to use against him, and that this could 

negatively affect her grades in his class. 

30. 

EA thought about reporting the incident to the school. However, another 

student, AS, had complained to the school about respondent and EA noticed that lots 

8 

of rumors about AS started to circulate at school. EA did not feel like the school would 

have taken action to terminate respondent even if she had shared her information. On 

balance, EA thought it was not worth reporting the incident to the school. She did not 

want to “ruin” her remaining time in high school.

31.

During her senior year, EA volunteered to serve as respondent’s TA. She 

had already decided she was not going to report his behavior to the school. She also 

knew that he knew she had “a lot on him” from her junior year. She decided to use this 

to her advantage. For example, so long as she responded to his social media 

communications, respondent would mark her present if she missed class as a TA. If she 

did not respond, he would mark her as absent. 

32. 

During her senior year, respondent continued to send EA Snapchat 

messages about his wife. He would also send EA pictures of her own neighborhood 

with a message stating something like, “I’m nearby, let’s meet up.” Respondent sent 

these messages after school hours. 

33. 

EA’s impression from respondent’s messages was that he wanted to meet 

and have sex with her. This seemed especially clear to her when respondent sent her 

messages about how his wife was not “pleasing him.” 

34. 

EA continued to communicate with respondent through social media and 

cell phone text messages until her first year of college in 2018. EA’s last message to 

respondent was a text message stating that he was “disgusting” and that he should 

think about his daughter and wife. Respondent replied, ”I hope I didn’t scare you off.” 

EA deleted all the communications from her phone because she was starting her 

“young adult life.” 

9 

35. 

Approximately two years ago, EA saw AL’s public Twitter post in which 

she described respondent’s conduct. EA contacted AL to let her know she was not 

alone. EA and AL then discussed privately with each other how respondent had 

behaved toward them. 

TESTIMONY OF AS

36. 

AS is a young woman who graduated from Central High East in 2018. She 

was a student in respondent’s history class during the second semester of her junior 

year, beginning in January 2017. 

37.

During class, respondent touched AS on her shoulders approximately 

three or four times and touched her hair two or three times. Respondent would usually 

put one hand on her shoulder while he was talking to her. AS cannot estimate how 

long he would keep his hand on her shoulder, because “it felt like forever.” 

38. 

The first time respondent touched her hair, he grabbed and tossed her 

hair up from behind, and told AS he liked her hair and that it was very soft. She did not 

like that he touched her hair. The second time respondent touched her hair, AS told 

him to “stop touching my hair.” 

39. 

AS noticed that respondent gave high grades to girls in the class who 

responded favorably to him. Respondent gave AS a high grade on a project she did 

not complete. After AS told respondent not to touch her hair, he gave her a zero out 

of 100 on her next assignment. AS then started “ranting” on Twitter, stating that she 

could not believe respondent was giving her zeros because she had “told him to leave 

me alone.” 

10

40. 

Respondent obtained AS’s cell phone number from her. She was a 

yearbook photographer and had photographs of soccer players he coached. 

Respondent insisted she send him the pictures by text message. AS told respondent 

she could send the photographs through their school email accounts, but he wanted 

her to send them via text message. AS complied. 

41. 

In March 2017, respondent and AS exchanged cell phone text messages 

regarding AS’s request that he grade her notebook. The text messages are as follows: 

AS: SO disappointed in you. You forgot to grade my 

notebook, even with my remind … [Thumbs down emoji] 

Respondent: Haha[.] I’ll get you[.] Make it worthwhile[.] 

AS: NOT cool 

Respondent: I was still salty [meaning, insulted] over your 

staff comment [on Twitter.] 

AS: HAHAH[.] THAT DOESN’T IMPLY [sic] TO YOU[.] IT’S THE 

CRAPPY VPS[.] 

Respondent: I thought of you just a little while ago too[.] 

Oh okay[.] I like having you actually[.] You make the day 

better until fifth [period.] 

AS: just grade my notebook PLEASE 

Respondent: Then it all goes bad 

AS: and I know … I’m great 

11

Respondent: Wow

AS: grade?? my?? notebook?? 

Respondent: Yes will do tomorrow morning [short gif/film 

clip of Jon Stewart showing exasperation] 

AS: YOURE NOT FUNNY omg[.] [thumbs up emoji] 

Respondent: Promise 

AS: and okay thanks

Respondent: Got you girl. 

42. 

AS realized respondent had been reading her Twitter posts, based on his 

comment in the text message that he was feeling “salty” about her Twitter comments. 

She kept her Twitter on a public setting, meaning that people can follow her tweets, 

but removed her tweets regarding the school staff because she did not want 

respondent to see these. 

43. 

In April 2017, respondent told AS and one of her classmates to put their 

cell phones away in class. AS asked why, because in her observation respondent 

generally did not seem to care when girls had their phones out in class. Respondent 

told her “because I said so” and took her phone to his desk. AS felt herself start to cry 

out of frustration, and falsely told respondent she needed to go to a yearbook 

meeting. She took her phone, left the classroom, and walked to her car in the parking 

lot. Shortly thereafter AS received a telephone call from her mother. Respondent had 

called the school office, and the school had called AS’s mother. 

12

44. 

That night AS spoke with her mother about her frustrations with

respondent. The next day, AS went to the school principal, who brought her to the vice

principal’s office. She told the vice principal that respondent had behaved 

inappropriately with girls, and that he had touched her shoulders and hair. AS also 

showed the vice principal the thread of test messages between her and respondent 

regarding the need for him to grade her notebook. AS was “crying really hard” as she 

described these matters. 

45. 

The next day, the principal called her to the office and thanked her for 

coming forward. The following Monday she received a new class schedule, placing her 

in a new class with one month remaining in the school year. For summer school, she 

was placed in a class taught by respondent’s brother. Respondent would come into 

the class most every day. This made AS uncomfortable, so she would get up and go to 

the bathroom. 

46. 

AS felt like the school was not doing anything about the situation. She 

did not come forward sooner because she was a 16-year-old girl going to a school 

where, to her understanding, other teachers had been reported. She did not think the 

school would do anything meaningful about her situation. 

47. 

Approximately two years after AS graduated, she saw AL’s Twitter posts 

about respondent. She then reached out to AL on Twitter. 

LETTERS OF REPRIMAND 

48.  On April 6, 2017, Central Unified School District (the District) issued a 

formal letter of reprimand to respondent based on his behavior toward students, 

including AS, as outlined in her testimony above. The letter of reprimand directed 

respondent to, among other things, (1) maintain professional standards especially 

13

when interacting with students, (2) model appropriate professional behavior, (3) cease 

and desist any communication with students by phone, text messages, or any social 

media, (4) create and maintain a positive learning environment to enhance student 

learning, (5) always keep the door open during non-instructional time when students 

are present and refrain from spending time alone with students, (6) maintain 

professional and ethical standards at all times, as outlined by District Board Policies 

and Bylaws. 

49.  On April 27, 2018, the District issued a formal letter of reprimand to 

respondent based on his behavior toward students. Specifically, during the 2017–18 

soccer season, respondent admitted to using foul language in the presence of 

student-athletes. In addition, respondent admitted to using unprofessional vernacular 

in text messages to students, including terms such as “Bro” and “Foo.” 

Respondent’s Evidence 

RESPONDENT’S TESTIMONY AND WRITTEN RESPONSE TO CTC ALLEGATIONS 

50. 

Respondent testified at hearing and submitted a written statement dated 

March 1, 2021, addressed to the Commission, and signed by respondent under penalty 

of perjury. Respondent’s testimony and his written statement in response to the 

Commission’s allegations are summarized below. 

51. 

Respondent was employed by the District for 16 years. He taught social 

studies courses, including world geography, world history, and US history. He also 

served as a coach for the boys’ soccer team. 

14

Student AL 

52.

AL was in respondent’s world history class. She was willing to work but 

seemed distracted at different times. She sought his advice and emotional support 

regarding social situations, academic issues, various life decisions, and her goals and 

aspirations. Respondent feels he served as a mentor to AL. Respondent also had

mentor/mentee relationships with other students. 

53. 

There was a time AL was living between two households—her mother’s 

home and her father’s home, with respective stepparents. It appeared to respondent 

that “chaos at home” made it difficult for AL to stay focused in the classroom. To his 

observation, AL frequently displayed “feelings of anxiety, defensiveness, and risky 

behavior.” Respondent “was concerned for her safety and wellbeing and … offered to 

help be supportive through these difficult times.” Respondent believes “this could have 

been misinterpreted” by AL. 

54. 

Because of AL’s “difficult homelife, and in case of emergency, 

[respondent] gave AL [his] cell phone number.” They “exchanged text messages that 

were supportive, friendly, but professional in nature.” Respondent believes AL 

“misconstrued [his] availability to her.”

55.

Respondent reported some of his concerns to the secretary at the 

student counseling office and suggested that AL should be called in for counseling. AL 

later told respondent that she had been called in for counseling.

56.

Respondent did not have the Snapchat handle “CerrilloRamirez9.” He did 

not send AL Snapchat messages from this handle. He did not send a Snapchat voice 

message to AL saying her middle name, nor did he send any picture to AL through 

Snapchat.

15

57. 

Respondent never complained about his wife to AL. He did, however, tell 

AL about things that he and his wife had done, such as where they went on a trip. 

58. 

Respondent was never in a room alone with AL. Respondent never 

hugged AL, nor did he ever put his hand on AL’s buttocks. Respondent never met or 

kissed AL in a Save Mart parking lot. 

59. 

Respondent maintained a relationship with AL after she graduated from 

high school. She sent him Snapchat pictures of her children and herself. AL also shared 

that her younger sister would be playing youth soccer. Respondent advised AL what 

type of equipment to purchase for soccer. 

60. 

In mid to late 2019, AL asked respondent through Snapchat for financial 

help to purchase a car. Respondent told her “no.” Respondent had previously given AL 

$30 for her to retake a DMV test. 

61. 

In June 2020, AL asked respondent for financial help to purchase a home. 

She had a lien of $1,400 that she needed to pay before she would be able to start the 

home purchase process. Respondent told AL he would not be able to help pay the lien. 

62. Within a few weeks after respondent refused to provide financial 

assistance to AL, she posted her Twitter comments about his behavior toward her. One 

of respondent’s colleagues in the sports program at Central High School told him that 

AL had posted comments on Twitter about him. Respondent believes AL made the 

allegations against him because he refused her request for financial assistance to 

purchase a car and a home. 

16

Student EA 

63.

Respondent does not know where EA lives. He never sent her a picture of 

his penis. He does not recall ever sending a text message to EA stating, “I hope I didn’t 

scare you off.” 

Student AS 

64. 

AS “falsely claimed” respondent touched her hair. Respondent never 

touched AS’s hair, and she never told him not to do so. Respondent believes AS made 

false allegations against him because she was “angry” at him. He had “reprimanded 

her for not following in-class school procedures.” Specifically, respondent had asked 

AS to put away her cell phone because she was showing videos to other students 

while in class. She continued to show the video, thereby “causing a disruption to the 

learning environment.” AS “consistently disrupted the learning environment by using 

electronics, eating, chatting, and other things.” Respondent “used various disciplinary 

measures including taking away electronics and verbal reprimands.” He also 

“contacted her mother regarding her disruptive behavior and dishonesty.” AS “became 

extremely upset and complained [that respondent] touched her hair when [he] did not 

do so.” Respondent feels as though AS “launched the complaint” to “get back” at him 

for calling her mother and reprimanding her. 

65.

A former student athlete informed respondent that AS had posted 

Twitter comments about his behavior. It was these Twitter comments that respondent 

referenced when he said in his text message exchange with AS that he was still “feeling 

salty.”

66.

Respondent wrote in his text message to AS, “make it worthwhile” 

because he was not sure whether she had turned in her notebook. At the time of their 

17

text message exchange, respondent was not at the school, where he had some student 

notebooks he needed to grade. Respondent was concerned AS would respond 

negatively to him if he said he had not yet seen her notebook.

67. 

Respondent wrote in the string of message to AS, “I like having you 

actually” “You make my day better until fifth.” By these messages respondent meant to 

convey that she was good to have in class because of her participation. 

68. 

The text messages between AS and respondent as presented and 

described during her testimony appears to be missing some entries, such that it is 

incomplete and out of context. For example, text message entries from AS are missing 

immediately before each of respondent’s three entries where he states, “I thought of 

you just a little while ago too” “Oh okay” and “I like having you actually.” AS had 

posted messages before each of those three statements that made respondent’s 

statements appropriate in context. 

Letters of Reprimand 

69. 

Respondent acknowledged that the District issued formal letters of 

reprimand to him on April 6, 2017, regarding his text messages with AS, and April 27, 

2018, regarding “foul language” and “unprofessional vernacular.” Regarding the 2018 

letter of reprimand, respondent acknowledged in his testimony that he used the word 

“crap” around members of the soccer team, and that he had used the words “bro” and 

“foo” in a text message to a member of the soccer team. “Bro” and “foo” are vernacular 

for the words brother and fool. 

70. 

Respondent also acknowledged in his testimony that he had been 

admonished in the letters of reprimand not to engage in social media with students. 

Respondent felt he needed to continue using cell phone text messages to 

18

communicate with students. Respondent did not always have access to the school 

email system. For example, sometimes when he was off campus he did not have email 

access, and two or three times per month the school email system would be 

unavailable for a few days. Respondent estimates that he used the school email system 

for approximately 60 percent of his communications with students, and some form of 

social media for approximately 40 percent of the communications. He used Twitter, 

Instagram, and Snapchat at various times in communicating with students.

Decision to Resign from District 

71. 

In June 2020, respondent met with the District assistant superintendent, 

who asked respondent if he wished to resign. Respondent felt that the assistant 

superintendent had made up his mind regarding the complaints about him. In light of 

the assistant superintendent’s expressed views, respondent chose to resign. 

72. 

Respondent is now employed as an instructional coach for an online high 

school. In this capacity he helps other teachers with their teaching practices. 

LETTERS OF SUPPORT AND NOTES OF APPRECIATION 

73.

Respondent submitted six letters of support from colleagues, friends, and 

a former student athlete. Two of the letters are from the same person. Respondent 

testified that he spoke with each of the authors regarding the allegations against him.

The letters taken together speak highly of respondent’s personal and professional 

ethics, and his commitment to teaching and coaching soccer. 

74. 

Respondent also submitted five short notes of appreciation from former 

students. Four of the notes are dated 2011 to 2019, and one is undated. None of the 

notes acknowledge any allegations against respondent. 

19

Witness Credibility and Findings 

75. Witnesses AL, EA, and AS were forthright in their demeanor while 

testifying. They clearly perceived and recalled respondent’s conduct toward them in 

person and on social media. There is no credible evidence that any of them are 

motivated by bias or a desire to fabricate. Rather, each of the witnesses, AL, EA, and 

AS, were motivated to tell the truth, and did so with poise and courage. Based on the 

evidence as a whole and factors set forth in Evidence Code section 780, witnesses AL, 

EA, and AS provided credible testimony. 

76. 

Respondent’s testimony and written statement are, taken as a whole, 

insincere and unconvincing. He attempted to establish that he was motivated by the 

best interests of his students. The evidence does not support this portrayal of his 

conduct. For example, respondent attempted to establish that AL “misinterpreted” and 

“misconstrued” his supportive conduct, and that she made false allegations against 

him because he refused to provide more financial help. The evidence establishes AL 

correctly understood respondent’s social media communications and physical contact 

with her as a series of sexual advances.

77.

Respondent also sought to portray AS as defiant and asserted that she 

made false allegations that he touched her hair because she was angry at him for 

reprimanding her and contacting her mother. While it is clear that AS was angry at 

respondent, it was substantially because he in fact touched her hair and graded her 

unfairly when she told him not to do so. 

78. 

Respondent’s testimony appears to be motivated purely by a desire to 

exonerate himself. He flatly denied the allegations of misconduct toward AL, EA, and 

AS. However, based on the factors set forth in Evidence Code section 780, respondent 

20

was not a credible witness. Moreover, his account of events is so at odds with the clear 

and convincing evidence as to lack any credibility on the material issues in this matter. 

79. 

Respondent also postulated in argument that someone other than 

respondent could have sent the Snapchat pictures of a penis to AL and EA. This is 

unconvincing. AL and EA had received numerous social media communications from 

respondent and were familiar with the names he used. While it is theoretically possible 

that someone else could have posed as respondent, based on the evidence presented 

such a scenario is more fanciful than real. 

80. 

Based on the evidence as a whole, including the testimony provided by 

AL, EA, and AS, complainant established the allegations alleged in the Accusation by 

clear and convincing evidence. 

Morrison Factors 

81. 

In 

(1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, the California 

Supreme Court concluded that a teaching credential cannot be disciplined for immoral 

conduct, unprofessional conduct, or conduct involving moral turpitude “unless that 

conduct indicates that the [educator] is unfit to teach.” (

. at p. 229.) The Court 

outlined factors to consider when determining whether an educator’s conduct 

demonstrates unfitness to teach, which have been codified in California Code of 

Regulations, title 5, section 80302, subdivision (a). Those factors are: (1) the likelihood 

that the conduct may have adversely affected students or fellow teachers, and the 

degree of such adversity is anticipated; (2) the proximity or remoteness in time of the 

conduct; (3) the types of credentials held or sought by the person involved; (4) any 

extenuating or aggravating circumstances surrounding the conduct; (5) the 

praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the conduct; (6) the 

21

likelihood of recurrence of the questioned conduct; (7) the extent to which disciplinary 

action may have an adverse impact or chilling effect upon the constitutional rights of 

the person involved, or other teachers; and (8) the publicity or notoriety given to the 

conduct. 

LIKELIHOOD OF ADVERSE EFFECTS ON STUDENTS OR FELLOW TEACHERS

82. 

Respondent’s social media communications and physical contact with 

students adversely affected their high school experiences. 

PROXIMITY OR REMOTENESS IN TIME

83. 

Respondent’s misconduct occurred during approximately 2014 to 2018. 

TYPES OF CREDENTIALS HELD AND SOUGHT

84. 

Respondent holds a Clear Single Subject Teaching Credential. 

EXTENUATING OR AGGRAVATING CIRCUMSTANCES 

85.  Neither the Education Code nor the applicable regulations specify what 

constitutes “extenuating circumstances.” However, California Code of Regulations, title 

5, section 80300, subdivision (m), defines “mitigating factor” as “an event or 

circumstance which demonstrates that the public, school children and the profession 

would be adequately protected by a more lenient degree of adverse action or no 

adverse action whatsoever.” Respondent did not present significant mitigating 

evidence. 

86. 

California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80300, subdivision (b), lists 

aggravating factors, the presence of which indicates a greater degree of discipline is 

necessary to protect students and the teaching profession. Aggravating factors include 

22

misconduct that evidences: (1) multiple wrongful acts or a pattern of misconduct; (2) 

bad faith or dishonesty; (3) significant harm to children entrusted to respondent’s care 

and/or harm to the educational system; (4) indifference toward the consequences of 

the misconduct; and (5) misconduct that occurred when respondent had prior notice 

or reprimands for similar misconduct. Respondent committed multiple wrongful acts in 

his conduct toward students and engaged in a pattern of abusive and manipulative 

conduct toward female students. Respondent’s misconduct harmed the students 

entrusted to his care and compromised the integrity of the educational system. By his 

continued misconduct, respondent demonstrated indifference toward the 

consequences for the students and the educational system. Some of respondent’s 

social media communications with students occurred after he had received a letter of 

reprimand directing him not to interact with students on social media. On balance, the 

aggravating circumstances far outweigh any extenuating or mitigating factors.

PRAISEWORTHINESS OR BLAMEWORTHINESS OF MOTIVES RESULTING IN THE 

MISCONDUCT 

87. 

The clear and convincing evidence is that respondent was motivated to 

develop physical sexual relationships with students. This is entirely blameworthy. 

Respondent’s testimony that he was acting out of concern for the welfare of his 

students is unconvincing, for the reasons stated above in the credibility findings.

LIKELIHOOD OF RECURRENCE 

88. 

Respondent persisted in his misconduct over a period of years. He has 

not demonstrated any rehabilitation. It is therefore likely that respondent would 

engage in similar misconduct in the future if he were allowed to retain a teaching 

credential. 

23

EXTENT TO WHICH DISCIPLINARY ACTION MAY INFLICT AN ADVERSE IMPACT 

OR CHILLING EFFECT ON CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS OF PERSONS INVOLVED OR 

OTHER TEACHERS

89. 

There is no evidence that discipline would adversely impact or chill 

respondent or any other teacher in the free exercise of their constitutional rights. 

PUBLICITY OR NOTORIETY OF MISCONDUCT 

90. 

Respondent’s misconduct was publicized on social media. 

Analysis 

91. 

Based on the Factual Findings as a whole, and considering all the 

 factors, complainant established by clear and convincing evidence that 

respondent is unfit to teach. For all the foregoing reasons, it would be inconsistent 

with the public interest to allow respondent to retain his existing credentials.

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Complainant has the burden of proving the allegations in the accusation 

by clear and convincing evidence. In an administrative proceeding in which a licensing 

agency seeks the suspension or revocation of an existing, professional license, the 

standard of proof is clear and convincing proof to a reasonable certainty. (

(1982) 135 Cal.App.3d 583.) Clear and convincing 

evidence requires proof that is so clear as to leave no substantial doubt and that is 

sufficiently strong to command the unhesitating assent of every reasonable mind. (

 (2008) 169 Cal.App.4th 176, 190.) 

24

Applicable Statutes 

2.

Education Code section 44421 states:

The Commission on Teacher Credentialing shall privately 

admonish, publicly reprove, revoke or suspend for immoral 

or unprofessional conduct, or for persistent defiance of, and 

refusal to obey, the laws regulating the duties of persons 

serving in the public school system, or for any cause that 

would have warranted the denial of an application for a 

credential or the renewal thereof, or for evident unfitness 

for service.

3. 

Education Code section 44345 states in part: 

The commission may deny an application for the issuance 

of a credential or the renewal of a credential made by any 

applicant who falls under any of the following categories: 

[¶] … [¶]

(e) Has committed any act involving moral turpitude. 

[¶] … [¶]

Any denial pursuant to subdivisions (a) to (e), inclusive, shall 

be based upon reasons related to the applicant’s fitness to 

teach … .

25

Causes for Discipline 

IMMORAL AND UNPROFESSIONAL CONDUCT

4.

The California Supreme Court has recognized that the terms “immoral 

conduct” and “unprofessional conduct” substantially overlap one another, such that 

conduct that constitutes one often includes the other. (

., 

, 1 Cal.3d at p. 221, fn. 9.) It is also true that the terms “immoral conduct” and 

“unprofessional conduct” are so general that they must be given meaning in relation 

to the particular profession involved. Although a teacher may have committed an 

immoral act, unless it indicates his unfitness to teach, it is not an appropriate basis for 

his discharge. (

. at p. 220.) The determinative test of a charge of immoral or 

unprofessional conduct is fitness to teach, which is a question of ultimate fact. (

(1977) 10 Cal.3d 691.)

5. 

The term “immoral” has been defined generally as that which is willful, 

flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral indifference to the opinions of 

respectable members of the community, and as an inconsiderate attitude toward good 

order and the public welfare. (

(1951) 36 Cal.2d 734, 

740.) “Unprofessional conduct” includes “‘that which violates the rules or ethical code 

of a profession or such conduct which is unbecoming a member of a profession in 

good standing.’” (

(1953) 41 

Cal.2d 546, 553; quoting, 66 Corpus Juris, p. 55.) 

6. 

Based on the Factual Findings and Legal Conclusions as a whole, 

respondent engaged in immoral and unprofessional conduct with students 

demonstrating that he is unfit to teach. Accordingly, cause exists to discipline 

26

respondent’s teaching credential for immoral and unprofessional conduct pursuant to 

Education Code section 44421.

MORAL TURPITUDE 

7. 

“Moral turpitude” has been defined as “everything done contrary to 

justice, honesty, modesty or good morals.” (

(1979) 89 Cal.App.3d 30, 36.) An act involves moral turpitude if it involves a serious 

breach of a duty owed to another or to society. (

 (2001) 25 

Cal.4th 11, 16.) 

8. 

Based on the Factual Findings and Legal Conclusions as a whole, 

respondent committed acts of moral turpitude in his conduct with students, 

demonstrating that he is unfit to teach. Accordingly, cause exists to discipline 

respondent’s teaching credential for conduct involving moral turpitude pursuant to 

Education Code section 44421, as it relates to Education Code section 44345, 

subdivision (e). 

EVIDENT UNFITNESS FOR SERVICE 

9.

“Evident unfitness for service” means a teacher is clearly not fit, not 

adapted to or unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of temperamental defects 

or inadequacies. (

 (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444.) “Unlike ‘unprofessional 

conduct,’ ‘evident unfitness for service’ connotes a fixed character trait, presumably 

not remediable merely on receipt of notice that one’s conduct fails to meet the 

expectations of the employing school district.” (

) 

27

10.

Based on the Factual Findings and Legal Conclusions as a whole,

respondent lacks the good judgment and fitness required of a teacher. The fact that he 

has not accepted responsibility for his actions further indicates that notice of his failure 

to meet professional standards is insufficient for him to reform his conduct. 

Accordingly, cause exists to discipline respondent’s teaching credential for evident 

unfitness for service pursuant to Education Code section 44421.

ORDER

Respondent Raul Martin’s Clear Single Subject Teaching Credential is hereby 

REVOKED.

DATE: August 29, 2022

TIMOTHY J. ASPINWALL

Administrative Law Judge

Office of Administrative Hearings

28

