BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Accusation Against: 

STACEY LEE WEATHERMAN, Respondent. 

Agency Case No. 2-86026225 

OAH No. 2022120780 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Cindy F. Forman, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ), Office of Administrative 

Hearings, State of California, heard this matter on May 15, and June 2, 2023, by 

videoconference. 

Christina Thomas, Deputy Attorney General, Department of Justice, State of 

California, represented complainant Mary Vixie Sandy, Executive Director of the 

California Commission on Teacher Credentialing (Commission). 

Tamra M. Smith, Esq., Egality Law LLP, represented respondent Stacey Lee 

Weatherman, now known as Stacey Lee Killinger. Respondent was present for portions 

of the hearing. 

The ALJ received testimony and documentary evidence. After the hearing, the 

ALJ re-opened the record to order the resubmission of a video originally admitted as 

complainant’s Exhibit 8 and to ensure respondent’s Exhibit K was properly redacted. 

The Order, dated and served on June 8, 2023, directed complainant to upload a new 

copy of the video into Case Center no later than June 16, 2023, because the original 

video was no longer fully viewable, and directed respondent to provide further 

information regarding material to be redacted on Exhibit K. Respondent complied with 

the Order regarding Exhibit K. Complainant did not resubmit a new copy of the video 

as ordered, and did not request a time extension to do so. Exhibit 8 therefore is 

considered in this decision only to the extent it was authenticated and its contents 

were described and discussed in testimony by others. 

The record closed and the matter was deemed submitted on June 16, 2023. 

SUMMARY 

Complainant seeks to revoke respondent’s teaching credential based on 

allegations of immoral conduct, unprofessional conduct, evident unfitness for service, 

and acts of moral turpitude relating to respondent’s conduct during the spring and 

summer of 2019. Complainant proved respondent, while teaching at a continuation 

high school, crossed professional boundaries and exercised poor judgment by 

allowing students to party, consume alcohol, and smoke marijuana at her home, 

engaging in an inappropriate relationship with a male student, disclosing personal 

marital details to another student, and participating in other improper behavior. 

Respondent does not dispute the allegations of the First Amended Accusation 

for the purposes of this proceeding. She asserts she has little recollection of what 

occurred during the spring and summer of 2019 because at the time she was suffering 

from a then-undiagnosed mental illness and any misconduct she engaged in was the 

result of that illness. Specifically, respondent asserts she was diagnosed with bipolar 1 

2 

disorder in the fall of 2019, and her behavior during the prior summer was a direct 

result of the manic phase of the disorder. Respondent’s treating psychiatrist and 

psychologist provided persuasive evidence supporting respondent’s assertion that her 

misconduct was caused by a psychiatric condition. Complainant offered no medical or 

other evidence rebutting the medical evidence presented. Accordingly, respondent 

proved her psychiatric issues caused her improper conduct, and she has undergone 

successful treatment for those issues such that her psychiatric condition is stable. 

The First Amended Accusation was triggered by respondent’s alleged 

misconduct, not her psychiatric condition. The evidence demonstrates respondent’s 

misconduct was egregious and placed students at great risk. However, the revocation 

of respondent’s credentials because of such misconduct would be unduly punitive 

considering respondent’s psychological state at the time of the relevant events, her 

demonstrated rehabilitative efforts, and her reputation as a stellar teacher. Because 

public protection, not punishment, is the primary goal of these proceedings and 

because respondent is in a position of trust as a teacher in daily contact with a 

vulnerable student population, suspending respondent’s credentials pending an 

independent psychiatric evaluation of respondent’s fitness to teach is warranted and 

consistent with the Commission’s authority as noted in California Code of Regulations, 

title 5 (CCR), section 80309, subdivision (c). If respondent is found mentally fit to teach, 

the public interest will be adequately protected by placing her credential on probation 

for three years with appropriate conditions to protect the educational community. 

/// 

/// 

/// 

3 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Jurisdiction and Parties 

1. 

On July 1, 2009, the Commission issued a Clear Single Subject Teaching 

Credential (credential) to respondent. The credential was in effect at all times relevant 

to the charges brought in the Accusation and the First Amended Accusation. The 

credential is scheduled to expire on August 1, 2024. The Commission also issued 

respondent a Certificate of Clearance on July 12, 2005, which expired on August 1, 

2010; a 30-day Substitute Teaching Credential on July 17, 2006, which expired on 

August 1, 2007, and a Preliminary Single Subject Credential on June 1, 2007, which 

expired on July 1, 2012. (Exhibit 2.) 

2. 

On October 27, 2020, the Commission informed respondent the 

Committee of Credentials (Committee) found probable cause existed for an adverse 

action against her. Respondent sought reconsideration of the Committee’s 

determination and also timely requested an administrative hearing. 

3. 

Complainant, in her official capacity, served the Accusation on 

respondent on July 29, 2022, and then served the First Amended Accusation on 

respondent on May 31, 2023. The First Amended Accusation seeks the same relief and 

reiterates the same factual allegations in the Accusation except that the First Amended 

Accusation now alleges in paragraph 19 that “Respondent furnished a controlled 

substance, Xanax, to students L.B. and J.A. while all were in her home” and adds the 

phrase “and smoke marijuana” to paragraph 20, line 8. (Exhibit 10, p. A126.) The First 

Amended Accusation seeks to revoke all credentials, certificates, and authorizations 

issued to respondent or take other appropriate adverse action in response to 

respondent’s conduct in the summer of 2019. 

4 

4. 

On September 10, 2022, respondent filed a timely Notice of Defense. On 

May 8, 2023, respondent filed an Amended Notice of Defense (Amended Notice). The 

Amended Notice states respondent admits certain paragraphs of the Accusation solely 

for the purposes of this proceeding and the Commission’s evaluation of respondent’s 

fitness to hold a credential. (The Amended Accusation had yet to be filed.) The 

Amended Notice also asserts that, during the times relevant to the charges in the 

Accusation, respondent suffered from an “acute undiagnosed mental health disability” 

that caused the conduct underlying the Accusation, and since that time, respondent 

received medical treatment and is currently stable. (Ex. Q, p. B135.) The Amended 

Notice further asserts complainant’s efforts to discipline respondent’s credentials for 

conduct occurring during and as a result of respondent’s disability constitutes unlawful 

discrimination in violation of applicable laws and regulations including CCR, section 

80309, subdivision (b). 

5. 

All jurisdictional requirements were satisfied to allow this matter to 

proceed to hearing. 

General Background 

6. 

Respondent is 40 years old and married with three children, ages 14, 12, 

and 8. She has a graduate degree in education. From 2006 until October 2019, 

respondent was employed as a teacher in the William S. Hart Union High School 

District (District). At all times relevant to the allegations in the First Amended 

Accusation, respondent worked as a social science teacher at Bowman High School 

(Bowman) in the District. Bowman is a continuation school attended by at-risk 

students. 

/// 

5 

7. 

By all accounts, respondent was an excellent teacher and a model for 

others while at Bowman. In addition to her regular teaching duties, respondent served 

as a District trainer for four years, an instructional coach for three to four years, the 

Bowman Associated Student Body director for three years, and a Bowman department 

chair for six years. Respondent was honored as Bowman Teacher of the Year for the 

2010–2011 and 2018–2019 school years. (Exhibit B, pp. B11–B14.) Bowman 

administrators nominated respondent for a Life Changer of the Year award. (Id., pp. 

B16–B25.) Respondent received uniformly positive teaching evaluations during her 

tenure at Bowman. At hearing, Bowman principal Nina Zamora testified respondent 

was an “outstanding teacher,” and she repeatedly brought other teachers to observe 

respondent in the classroom. Several teachers and a former student also submitted 

declarations attesting to respondent’s dedication to her students, professionalism, and 

effectiveness as a teacher while at Bowman. (Exhibits N, O, and P.) Respondent has no 

history of discipline by the District or the Commission. 

8. 

In October 2019, the District became aware of allegations regarding an 

inappropriate relationship between respondent and former Bowman student J.A. 

(Students, parents, and non-District personnel with knowledge of the alleged 

misconduct are identified by their initials for privacy purposes.) From April 2021 

through July 2022, Jeffrey Osborne, Special Investigator for the Commission (SI 

Osbourne), investigated those allegations and prepared a report of his findings. 

(Exhibit 3.) As part of his investigation, SI Osbourne interviewed several former 

Bowman students, their parents, Ms. Zamora, Bowman employee Carrie Covell, and 

others. SI Osbourne included memoranda of his interviews with former student L.B., 

V.F., Ms. Zamora, Ms. Covell, and J.A.’s mother in his report. SI Osbourne was unable to 

interview J.A., who passed away in February 2021 of causes not made known at the 

hearing. SI Osbourne was also unable to interview student T.W. (The interview 

6 

memoranda constitute administrative hearsay; thus, under Government Code section 

11513, subdivision (d), their contents are considered only to the extent they 

supplement or explain direct evidence.) 

Evidence of the Alleged Misconduct 

9. 

The First Amended Accusation alleges that during the summer of 2019, 

respondent engaged in the following misconduct while teaching at Bowman: 

19. Respondent furnished a controlled substance, Xanax to 

students L.B. and J.A. while all were in her home. 

20. Respondent allowed male student J.A. and his friends to 

party and consume alcohol and smoke marijuana at 

Respondent's home. Respondent consumed alcohol with 

them at Respondent's home on at least one occasion. 

21. A video shows student J.A. to be unconscious while 

holding a White Claw alcoholic beverage at Respondent's 

home and student J.A. "shotgunning" an alcoholic beverage 

at Respondent's home. 

22. In addition to drinking alcohol and partying at 

Respondent's home, Respondent and student J.A. would 

often retire to the bedroom together after the party or 

gathering concluded. Respondent and student J.A. did not 

come out of the bedroom until the next morning. 

23. Respondent purchased clothing for student J.A. When 

Respondent could not reach student J.A., Respondent 

7 

would text student J.A.'s friend(s) to contact or locate 

student J.A. 

24. Respondent also shared personal details about her 

divorce and personal life with student T.W. Respondent was 

admonished by the District for doing so. 

(Exhibit 10, p. A126.) 

10. 

Former Bowman student L.B. confirmed in testimony at the hearing and 

in statements made to SI Osbourne (Exhibit 3, pp. A62–A63) that respondent had at 

least one party at her home in June 2019 during which he, J.A., who was his best 

friend, and others drank alcohol and smoked marijuana while respondent was home. 

Respondent also offered J.A. and him Xanax at the party. Respondent’s husband was 

not home when the party was held, and during that time, J.A. and others slept at 

respondent’s house. 

11. 

The party described by L.B. was depicted in a videotape provided to Ms. 

Covell and Ms. Zamora in October 2019. At hearing, L.B. authenticated and described 

the contents of the video (admitted as Exhibit 8). The video depicts L.B. and J.A. 

partying at respondent’s home. The video was taken by another student who was at 

the party. Respondent is not shown in the video. In the video, J.A. is passed out with a 

White Claw alcoholic beverage in his hand while sitting in a chair in what appears to 

be respondent’s kitchen. The video also shows J.A. “shotgunning” a White Claw. 

12. 

L.B.’s testimony was inconsistent at times, and thus not fully credible. L.B. 

first testified the party at respondent’s home lasted three to four days; he later 

testified the partying lasted four to six days. Additionally, at hearing, L.B. testified he 

only was at respondent’s house this one time and after this party, L.B. never returned 

8 

to her house. However, L.B. told SI Osbourne respondent would oftentimes invite J.A., 

L.B., and the other students to her home, be at home to let them inside, and stay and 

party with them. L.B. also told SI Osbourne on multiple occasions respondent informed 

L.B. and the others that a certain door at her house would remain unlocked for them 

to enter in the event she was not there. (Exhibit 3, pp. A63.) 

13. 

L.B. was never respondent’s student while at Bowman. He went to 

respondent’s house at the invitation of J.A. L.B. testified he believed respondent and 

J.A. had more than a teacher-student relationship because respondent often texted 

L.B. to locate J.A. and respondent also bought J.A. expensive clothing. Although L.B. 

had no direct knowledge of any sexual relationship between J.A. and respondent, he 

assumed their relationship was physically intimate because he saw respondent and J.A. 

during the partying go upstairs where respondent’s bedroom was located, and come 

downstairs in the morning. He did not testify as to how often this occurred. During his 

interview with SI Osbourne, L.B. told SI Osbourne everyone knew about “something 

was going on with J.A. and respondent, but it was sort of an understood agreement 

not to ask questions.” (Exhibit 3, p. A63.) 

14. 

J.A.’s mother K.A. confirmed L.B.’s testimony regarding respondent’s 

relationship with J.A. According to her testimony at hearing, K.A. thought it odd when 

respondent began to befriend his son. Respondent took J.A. for lunch and went on 

shopping sprees where she bought him over $1,000 worth of clothes. K.A. told SI 

Osbourne she understood from J.A.’s statements to her that he and respondent had 

more than a teacher/student relationship. However, she had no first-hand knowledge 

of the nature of their relationship. 

/// 

9 

15. 

After the party depicted in the video and sometime before August 16, 

2019, Ms. Zamora, who was Bowman’s assistant principal at the time, learned from 

another teacher that student T.W. was sharing information regarding respondent’s 

pending divorce and other personal subjects with other students. Ms. Zamora, who 

provided a statement to SI Osbourne and also testified at hearing, then met with 

respondent on August 16, 2019, to discuss T.W.’s statements. At the meeting, Ms. 

Zamora directed respondent to stop sharing her personal information with students. 

Respondent agreed to do so. She also told Ms. Zamora T.W. had babysat for her 

during the summer break but she had ended T.W.’s employment after learning while 

babysitting T.W. had people over the house without respondent’s approval. (Exhibit 9, 

p. A118.) According to Ms. Zamora, the meeting ended on a positive note whereby 

respondent agreed not to have any further personal discussions with T.W. At the time 

of her discussion with respondent regarding T.W., Ms. Zamora was unaware of any 

Bowman students partying at respondent’s home. 

16. 

Respondent admitted to the factual allegations of the First Amended 

Accusation for the purpose of this proceeding because, as she credibly testified, she 

had no recollection of the events of the summer of 2019. Her inability to remember 

made it impossible to dispute or disprove some of the allegations or the testimony by 

L.B., Ms. Zamora, or K.A. However, the video makes clear that at least one party took 

place at respondent’s home where students drank alcohol. 

Events Of October 2019 

17.  On October 9, 2019, Carrie Covell, Bowman’s office manager at the time, 

received a telephone call from V.F. discussing her concerns about respondent’s 

relationship with J.A. It was not made known in the record whether V.F. was a Bowman 

student at the time or a former Bowman student. Ms. Covell transferred the call to Ms. 

10 

Zamora. After reiterating her concerns to Ms. Zamora, V.F. then emailed Ms. Zamora 

the video file discussed above. On October 10, 2019, Ms. Zamora alerted District 

Deputy Superintendent Michael Vierra of the call and the video. (Exhibit 9, p. A117.) 

18.  On October 14, 2019, District personnel informed respondent at an in-

person meeting she was being placed on administrative leave pending an 

investigation of her interactions with students. Ms. Zamora was present at the 

meeting. The District did not provide any details to respondent about the investigation 

or the alleged interactions that were cause for concern. The District did not show 

respondent the video taken at her home. 

Respondent’s Evidence 

19. 

Respondent submitted a declaration, declarations from her parents, 

husband, psychologist, friends, and colleagues, and letters from her psychologist and 

psychiatrist as well as her medical records to support her contention that her 

misconduct was a result of a manic episode caused by bipolar 1 disorder. Respondent, 

her husband, her best friend, her psychologist, and her psychiatrist testified to her 

psychiatric condition before, during, and after the events of the summer of 2019. The 

testimony by respondent and by the other witnesses was credible and persuasive. 

EVENTS LEADING UP TO THE INCIDENTS ALLEGED IN THE FIRST AMENDED 

ACCUSATION 

20. 

Respondent first experienced depression and occasional panic attacks 

after the birth of her second child. She was prescribed anti-depressants to treat the 

depression and Xanax as needed for the panic attacks. 

/// 

11 

21. 

In May and then in early June 2019, respondent sought medical help 

because she was experiencing more frequent and more crippling panic attacks and her 

medication was no longer effective to address these attacks. Medical records indicate 

her physician diagnosed respondent with generalized anxiety disorder and severe 

major depressive disorder and switched her medication. (Exhibit B, pp. B85, B88.) The 

new medication adversely affected respondent. She had trouble concentrating, no 

longer cared what people thought, and stopped censoring her language. 

22. 

Respondent asserts she has little memory of what she did or said during 

the summer and fall of 2019. She has pieced together some of what occurred by 

reviewing her credit card statements and listening to others who spent time with her 

during that period. Respondent does not recollect she spent three weeks on a Hawaii 

vacation with her parents and daughters in June 2019. She has no memory of teaching 

summer school in the District in July 2019; she only knows she did so because she has 

paystubs for her work. Respondent has spotty memories of waking up in her car at 

random remote locations, but she does not recall how she got there. Her credit card 

statements showing gas station charges at these remote locations are the only 

confirmations her spotty memories are true. Her credit card statements also reflect 

shopping sprees totaling $25,000, although she does not remember such shopping 

trips. Respondent also has no memory of conducting professional development 

training in August 2019. Although respondent remembers discussing student T.W. with 

Ms. Zamora, respondent does not recall telling T.W. anything about respondent’s 

personal life. 

23. 

Respondent’s husband, Michael Killinger, both in testimony and a 

declaration (Exhibit H), confirmed something was amiss with respondent starting in 

June 2019. Respondent told him she wanted a divorce, which according to Mr. Killinger 

12 

“came out of nowhere.” Mr. Killinger described respondent’s behavior during the 

summer and fall of 2019 as irresponsible and baffling. Respondent often left the house 

in the middle of the night or disappeared for the weekend. Respondent spent time 

with people he did not know well and was secretive about her phone and her 

whereabouts. Respondent appeared to only care for herself and was inattentive to 

their children and their friends. The situation deteriorated as the summer progressed, 

and Mr. Killinger considered taking his children and leaving the house. According to 

Mr. Killinger, respondent’s conduct was completely out of character, and at the time, 

neither he, their friends, nor their family were aware of the cause. Mr. Killinger and 

respondent attended marriage counseling to address the chaos but the therapy was 

unsuccessful. 

24. 

Respondent’s long-time best friend Amy Archie, who testified at the 

hearing, also observed marked changes in respondent’s behavior during the summer 

and fall of 2019. Before that time, Ms. Archie described respondent as an “awesome 

mom and woman” and a teacher who was dedicated to her students. Ms. Archie found 

respondent started to act “weird” during the summer and fall of 2019. She noticed 

students visiting respondent’s home, which Ms. Archie thought was unusual, and Ms. 

Archie was shocked when respondent told her she wanted to divorce her husband. 

According to Ms. Archie, respondent made “questionable” choices over the summer. 

Respondent drove at night to the beach by herself, stopped eating, and was 

“completely different.” 

25. 

Respondent’s mother and father also noted respondent’s change in 

behavior at this time. (Exhibits I, J.) Respondent’s mother noted respondent was acting 

strange on the June Hawaii trip, including driving fast and going out alone at night. 

She observed respondent continued to act strangely when they returned home. 

13 

According to respondent’s mother, respondent was ordinarily highly organized and 

meticulous, but by July 2019 respondent’s home and car were messy and disorganized. 

Respondent also told her during this time she hated teaching. 

EVENTS OF OCTOBER 2019 

26. 

Respondent was unaware anything was remiss with her teaching until she 

attended the October 2019 meeting where District representatives placed her on 

administrative leave. Upon leaving the meeting, respondent had a panic attack and felt 

suicidal. According to Ms. Zamora’s notes regarding the events of October 14, 2019, 

prepared soon after those events, respondent told Ms. Zamora she wanted to die and 

she was spinning out of control. (Exhibit T.) Ms. Zamora believed respondent thought 

she was placed on administrative leave because student T.W. babysat for her during 

the summer; respondent made no mention of any partying or other inappropriate 

relationships. Respondent told Ms. Zamora she wanted to check herself into the 

hospital and insisted on driving herself to the emergency room. After respondent 

crashed her car on the way to the hospital and called Ms. Zamora to pick her up, 

respondent told Ms. Zamora she had moved out of the family home, had nowhere to 

live, and repeated she wanted to end her life. Ms. Zamora further noted when she 

arrived at the Henry Mayo Hospital (Mayo) with respondent, respondent’s husband 

also arrived and confirmed they were going through a divorce, respondent had moved 

out, and respondent has been dishonest and deceitful with him. He also shared she 

was disappearing for days at a time. (Id. at p. B152.) 

27. 

At Mayo, respondent was admitted for a 5250 hold (a 72-hour 

hospitalization for a person deemed to be a danger to herself or others) under Welfare 

and Institutions Code section 5150. Respondent remained at Mayo until October 17, 

2019. (Exhibit B, pp. B28–B61.) Upon her release, the Mayo doctors directed 

14 

respondent to seek care from a psychiatrist as well as a therapist at New U Therapy 

Center (New U). (Id., p. B34.) On October 21, 2019, respondent met with a New U 

therapist, and on October 22, 2019, a New U psychiatrist diagnosed respondent with 

bipolar 1 disorder and prescribed her new medications. (Id., p. B64.) This was the first 

time respondent learned she had bipolar 1 disorder. 

28.  On October 22, 2019, respondent resigned from her position as a social 

science teacher at Bowman. (Exhibit 7.) Respondent remained unaware of the subject 

of the District’s investigation at the time of her resignation. At hearing, respondent 

characterized her resignation as “impulsive.” She was depressed and spiraling 

downward at the time. Respondent had consulted a lawyer regarding disability 

retirement before sending her resignation email, but she has no recollection of doing 

so; she only knows because of an email she received from the lawyer confirming their 

conversation. 

RESPONDENT’S RECOVERY 

29. 

Although respondent was compliant with her medication and therapy 

offered at New U, she did not feel she was improving, and on November 8, 2019, she 

checked herself into Resilience Treatment Center (Resilience), a residential treatment 

center in Beverly Hills. She resided at Resilience for 24 days. At Resilience, the doctors 

changed her medication, and she began to feel better. Respondent was released from 

Resilience on December 2, 2019. 

30. 

Respondent found Resilience helpful in ameliorating her condition. 

However, respondent believed she needed further treatment. On December 3, 2019, 

the day after her release from Resilience, respondent began treatment at the Intensive 

Outpatient Program at Northridge Hospital (Northridge Outpatient). That program 

15 

required five days of outpatient therapy each week for six hours each day. As 

respondent progressed in the program, she was able to reduce her required therapy to 

three days a week for four hours each day. She continued in the program until March 

2020. 

31.  While participating in the Northridge Outpatient program, respondent 

returned to New U for treatment. In early January 2020, her New U psychiatrist 

prescribed respondent lithium, which has since been effective. A note by her treating 

psychiatrist dated January 22, 2020, assessed respondent as “Much improved from 

previous visit.” (Exhibit B, p. B80.) In late January 2020, respondent was forced to find 

new healthcare providers because New U no longer accepted her insurance. She then 

began seeing a new therapist, Helen G. Meek, LMFT, and a new psychiatrist, Dr. 

Michael Golder. She also participated in couples therapy and had her children see a 

therapist as well. 

32. 

Respondent continues to see Ms. Meek to this day. She had to change 

her psychiatrist again in August 2021 because of insurance reasons and now sees 

Vasudha Ahuja, M.D., to manage her medication, which includes mood stabilizers. 

Respondent reports she is stable. She no longer experiences panic attacks, 

breakdowns, or depression. She sleeps better and has better control over her impulses. 

Respondent keeps all her medical appointments, sets her alarm to take her 

medication, pays attention to what she eats, and wears a Fitbit bracelet to monitor her 

heart rate and sleep schedule. She keeps her medical team well-apprised of any 

changes in her medical condition. 

33.  Mr. Killinger and Ms. Armey, as well as respondent’s parents, believe 

respondent has returned to normal. (Exhibits H, I, J.) They confirmed respondent takes 

her medication without issue and regularly attends her therapy. Mr. Killinger also 

16 

underwent therapy with respondent where he learned more about respondent’s 

condition and the symptoms and signs of a manic episode. 

34. 

Although Mr. Killinger and Ms. Armey initially had doubts regarding 

respondent’s inability to recall the events of the summer of 2019, they both now 

believe respondent does not remember her conduct during this time. Ms. Armey 

testified respondent has had many opportunities to discuss with her what happened 

with her students, but respondent has never done so. Although respondent 

acknowledged what she is accused of was wrong, she has repeatedly told Ms. Armey 

she has no recollection of sleeping with a student or any of the other alleged 

misconduct. Mr. Killinger and Ms. Armey also no longer have concerns regarding 

respondent’s ability to care for children safely and teach. Ms. Armey regularly leaves 

her children in respondent’s care. And Mr. Killinger is comfortable leaving his three 

daughters with respondent, who remains his wife. 

RESPONDENT’S CURRENT EMPLOYMENT 

35. 

In August 2020, respondent began working for an online school. (The 

online school has not been identified at the request of the school.) She teaches social 

studies remotely to students in the sixth through twelfth grades. She is happy working 

in an online environment and has received uniform praise for her work. 

36.  Maggie Champlin-Alexander, known as Maggie Champlin, submitted a 

declaration and testified regarding respondent’s current employment. Ms. Champlin 

has been the content specialist at the online school for 14 years. According to Ms. 

Alexander, respondent is an effective educator. Ms. Champlin interviewed respondent 

for the job and was her mentor for the 2020 to 2021 school year. Ms. Champlin 

observed respondent’s interactions with students, and she was never concerned about 

17 

their safety. After respondent completed the mentor program, Ms. Champlin 

supervised and interacted with respondent as the school’s department head. Ms. 

Champlin never witnessed respondent exhibit any alarming behavior. 

37. 

Respondent disclosed her bipolar 1 disorder diagnosis to Ms. Champlin 

in the summer of 2022. Respondent indicated in that discussion a strong desire to 

continue with her treatment. Ms. Champlin is familiar with bipolar 1 disorder because 

she has a close family relative with the same diagnosis. She has been trained to 

identify signs of someone suffering from mental health episodes, and she has never 

seen respondent demonstrate these behaviors. Respondent’s appearance, behavior, 

and the appearance of her home, all visible via the classroom videoconference, have 

not triggered any red flags. Ms. Champlin described respondent as “one of the most 

vital teachers” in her department. 

38.  Ms. Champlin is aware of the allegations in the Accusation. Based on her 

present knowledge of respondent, she cannot believe the allegations are true. 

However, even if proven, Ms. Champlin is interested in respondent’s current qualities 

and believes she is fit to teach. Ms. Champlin wrote the following: 

If [respondent] losses [sp] her California teaching certificate, 

education is losing out on an incredible teacher. She 

impacts the lives of her students and the teachers around 

her daily. She is vital to the education profession for her 

teaching abilities and the support she offers to the 

educators around her. She has a natural ability to support 

others, which can be seen in her leadership and problem-

solving qualities in her department. She is always offering a 

lending hand or is someone teachers can bounce ideas 

18 

with. Education as a whole will miss out if [respondent] is no 

longer allowed to hold a teaching certificate. 

(Exhibit K, p. B138.) 

MEDICAL EVIDENCE 

Helen G. Meek MFT 

39.  Helen G. Meek has been a licensed marriage and family therapist in 

private practice since 1987. Before then, she held a pupil personnel services credential 

and worked as a school counselor for 10 years and as a high school English teacher for 

12 years. Ms. Meek has treated several patients with bipolar 1 disorder in her practice. 

Ms. Meek submitted a letter and declaration and provided testimony at hearing 

confirming respondent’s medical condition and her fitness to teach. (Exhibits D, E.) 

40. 

Since January 4, 2020, Ms. Meek has seen respondent for therapy once a 

week as part of respondent’s bipolar 1 disorder treatment. Based on her conversations 

with respondent, her review of respondent’s medical history, and her knowledge and 

expertise as a therapist, Ms. Meeks believes respondent’s 2019 conduct was caused by 

undiagnosed bipolar disorder, and the conduct constituted a manic episode lasting 

several months. At the time, respondent was taking anti-depressants and anti-anxiety 

medication that may have exacerbated respondent’s undiagnosed bipolar disorder 

condition. 

41.  Ms. Meek describes respondent as “very intelligent and highly 

functional.” Based on her discussions with respondent, she believes respondent does 

not remember much about the June through August 2019 period. She reports 

respondent was “completely mystified” about where her credit card statements from 

19 

this period indicated she had been. Ms. Meek believes when respondent was manic, 

her mind was racing so quickly memories were unable to set in. Ms. Meek also 

reported respondent exhibits a sense of shame over what occurred and is very 

motivated to avoid a relapse. 

42.  Ms. Meek has no reservations about respondent’s fitness to teach or 

associate with children. Ms. Meek is aware of the allegations against respondent and 

finds them inconsistent with the person she knows through therapy. Respondent has 

not suffered any manic episodes since respondent began treatment with Ms. Meek. 

Respondent is fully medication compliant, open to self-reflection, and motivated to 

remain in treatment to preserve her family and her career. Ms. Meek acknowledges 

there is always a risk of relapse but she does not expect respondent to do so. 

Vasudha Ahuja, M.D. 

43.  Dr. Ahuja, a board-certified psychiatrist, testified at the hearing and 

submitted a letter vouching for respondent’s fitness to teach. (Exhibit G.) Dr. Ahuja has 

treated patients with bipolar 1 disorder since 2003, and she has treated respondent 

since August 11, 2020. According to Dr. Ahuja, bipolar 1 disorder is a condition with 

separate or sometimes mixed episodes of mania or depression. Patients with bipolar 1 

disorder return to good functionality between episodes. The mania is characterized by 

racing thoughts, decreased need for sleep, grandiose conduct, recklessness, and 

psychotic conduct. A manic episode can last between a week to nine months without 

treatment. An individual in a manic period typically has no control over their thoughts 

or actions and acts completely out of character. Dr. Ahuja further explained mania is 

treated primarily with mood stabilizers and antipsychotics. Oftentimes, people with 

bipolar 1 disorder only have one manic episode because controlling mania is easily 

done through medication. 

20 

44.  Dr. Ahuja too does not doubt respondent’s inability to remember the 

events of the summer of 2019. She believes respondent had a manic episode that 

summer based on descriptions provided by Mr. Killinger and respondent’s eldest 

daughter. Dr. Ahuja explained memory loss of the kind respondent complains of is 

commonly associated with a manic episode. When an individual is in a state of 

psychosis, the process of storing memory is disturbed; additionally, a person may 

repress memories because they are so disturbing. 

45.  Dr. Ahuja sees respondent for medication management and 

psychotherapy every one to two months. She is confident of respondent’s bipolar 1 

disorder diagnosis because of respondent’s historic reactions to the medications 

prescribed, her current reaction to those medications, and respondent’s recounting of 

her medical history. She agrees with Ms. Meek respondent’s change in medication in 

early 2019 may have triggered respondent’s manic episode. Dr. Ahuja finds 

respondent’s medical condition to be currently stable. Although there is always a risk 

respondent’s condition may change, Dr. Ahuja believes respondent’s prognosis is 

good considering respondent’s punctual and regular attendance at all her 

appointments with Dr. Ahuja, respondent’s investment in staying mentally stable, her 

compliance with her medication regime, even when it initially caused significant 

weight gain, and the support respondent receives from her family and friends. 

According to Dr. Ahuja, respondent and her family members would now know 

immediately if she began to destabilize, and any mania could be easily addressed with 

a change of medication. Dr. Ahuja has no concerns about respondent’s current fitness 

to be with children or to teach. 

/// 

/// 

21 

OTHER EVIDENCE 

46. 

Respondent expressed horror and embarrassment in response to 

complainant’s charges. Respondent testified not knowing what she did and whether 

she hurt anyone during the time she was in a manic episode “drives her crazy.” To this 

day, respondent cannot understand why she told people she wanted to divorce her 

husband when they have always been good friends who never fought. She does not 

consider herself someone who would leave her home in the middle of the night to see 

a student or go to a remote location. She would never send personal or inappropriate 

texts to a student, give a student Xanax, allow students to smoke or drink in her home 

or talk about her personal life in detail with students. She is mortified by the 

suggestion she pursued a student. Respondent acknowledges she sometimes bought 

food, clothing, and other necessities for some Bowman students but she did not do so 

for inappropriate purposes. Ms. Zamora, Ms. Covell, other Bowman educators, and a 

Bowman student all confirmed respondent’s conduct during the summer of 2019 was 

not consistent with respondent’s character or her prior behavior. (Exhibit 3, p. A46; 

Exhibits L, O, P.) 

47. 

Respondent was candid with the Commission regarding her conduct and 

her medical treatment. She was “shocked and devasted” when she first learned of the 

findings of the Committee of Credentials (Committee) on October 27, 2020. In her 

November 9, 2020 response, respondent explained any misconduct that occurred 

during the summer of 2019 was a result of a mental disability and that disability was 

now under control (Exhibit R.) Respondent offered to submit to a medical examination 

under CCR section 80309, subdivision (c), to confirm her fitness to teach. (Exhibit A.) 

On January 11, 2023, respondent wrote again to the Committee to inform them of 

developments in her medical condition. (Exhibit C.) The Committee’s responses to the 

22 

November 9, and 30, 2020, and January 11, 2023 letters were not made part of the 

record. The record also does not include any request by the Commission that 

respondent submit to a medical examination. 

48. 

Respondent’s testimony was open and direct. Respondent wants to keep 

her credential so she can keep working with kids. She has worked with children her 

entire life and loves teaching. Respondent is not in a rush to return to classroom 

teaching but is confident in her capability to do so because of her medications and the 

stability of her condition. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

Legal Standards 

1. 

Complainant bears the burden of proving the alleged grounds for 

discipline by clear and convincing evidence to a reasonable certainty. (See Gardner v. 

Commission on Professional Competence (1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035, 1039–1040; 

Ettinger v. Board of Medical Quality Assurance (1982) 135 Cal.App.3d 853, 856.) Clear 

and convincing evidence “requires a finding of high probability,” and has been 

described as “requiring that the evidence be ‘“so clear as to leave no substantial 

doubt”; “sufficiently strong to command the unhesitating assent of every reasonable 

mind.”‘” [Citation.]” (In re Angelia P. (1981) 28 Cal.3d 908, 919.) 

2. 

The Commission is authorized to “privately admonish, publicly reprove, 

revoke or suspend” the credential of a teacher for “immoral or unprofessional conduct 

. . . or for any cause that would have warranted the denial of an application for a 

credential or the renewal thereof, or for evident unfitness for service.” (Code, § 44421.) 

The Commission may also place a teacher on probation subject to appropriate terms. 

23 

(CCR, section 80300, subd. (t) [a suspension may be stayed “on condition of 

probation”].) 

3. 

“The term ‘immoral’ has been defined generally as that which is hostile to 

the welfare of the general public and contrary to good morals. Immorality has not 

been confined to sexual matters, but includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or 

indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, dissoluteness, or as wilful, flagrant, or 

shameless conduct showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable 

members of the community, and as an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and 

the public welfare. [Citation.]” (Orloff v. Los Angeles Turf Club (1951) 36 Cal.2d 734, 

740; see also Board of Ed. of San Francisco Unified School Dist. v. Weiland (1960) 179 

Cal.App.2d 808, 811.) 

4. 

“Unprofessional conduct” has been described as “‘that which violates the 

rules or ethical code of a profession or such conduct which is unbecoming a member 

of a profession in good standing.’” (Board of Educ. of the City of Los Angeles v. Swan 

(1953) 41 Cal.2d 546, 553, overruled in part on other grounds in Bekiaris v. Board of 

Education (1972) 6 Cal.3d 575.) “[T]he definition of immoral or unprofessional conduct 

must be considered in conjunction with the unique position of public school teachers, 

upon whom are imposed ‘responsibilities and limitations on freedom of action which 

do not exist in regard to other callings.’ [Citation.]” (San Diego Unified School Dist. v. 

Commission on Professional Competence (2011) 194 Cal.App.4th 1454, 1466.) 

5. 

“Moral turpitude is a concept that ‘defies exact description’ [citation] and 

‘cannot be defined with precision’ [citation].” (In re Grant (2014) 58 Cal.4th 469, 475–

476.) “Our Supreme Court has defined moral turpitude as ‘an act of baseness, vileness 

or depravity in the private and social duties which a man owes to his fellowmen, or to 

society in general, contrary to the accepted and customary rule of right and duty 

24 

between man and man.’ [Citation.] Moral turpitude has also been described as any 

crime or misconduct committed without excuse, or any ‘dishonest or immoral’ act not 

necessarily a crime. [Citation.] The definition depends on the state of public morals 

and may vary according to the community or the times, as well as on the degree of 

public harm produced by the act in question. [Citation.]” (Clerici v. Department of 

Motor Vehicles (1990) 224 Cal.App.3d 1016, 1027.) Moral turpitude has also been 

described as the “‘general readiness to do evil.’ [Citation.]” (Donley v. Davi (2009) 180 

Cal.App.4th 447, 458.) 

6. 

“Evident unfitness for service” is a term that “connotes a fixed character 

trait, presumably not remediable merely on receipt of notice that one’s conduct fails to 

meet the expectations of the employing school district.” (Woodland Joint Unified 

School Dist. v. Commission on Professional Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 

1444.) A teacher who is evidently unfit for service has a “flaw of temperament” 

resulting in misconduct, and there is no reasonable likelihood the temperament can be 

reformed to ensure the bad conduct will not recur. (Id., p. 1445.) 

7. 

To discipline a teacher’s credential on grounds of immoral conduct, 

unprofessional conduct, or evident unfitness for service, it must also be established the 

conduct renders the teacher unfit to teach. (Morrison v. State Board of Education 

(1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 229–230 (Morrison).) “[A]n individual can be removed from the 

teaching profession only upon a showing that his retention in the profession poses a 

significant danger of harm to either students, school employees, or others who might 

be affected by his actions as a teacher.” (Id., at p. 235.) 

8. 

The inquiry regarding a teacher’s fitness to teach rests on “whether any 

adverse inferences can be drawn from [the individual’s] past conduct as to [his or her] 

teaching ability, or as to the possibility that publicity surrounding past conduct may in 

25 

and of itself substantially impair [the individual’s] function as a teacher.” (Morrison, 

supra, 1 Cal.3d at p. 235.) In evaluating the teacher’s fitness, the Commission may 

consider such matters, commonly known as the Morrison factors, as: “(1) The 

likelihood that the conduct may have adversely affected students, fellow teachers, or 

the educational community, and the degree of such adversity anticipated; [¶] (2) The 

proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct; [¶] (3) The type of credential held or 

applied for by the person involved; [¶] (4) The extenuating or aggravating 

circumstances surrounding the conduct; [¶] (5) The praiseworthiness or 

blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the conduct; [¶] (6) The likelihood of the 

recurrence of the questioned conduct; [¶] (7) The extent to which disciplinary action 

may inflict an adverse impact or chilling effect upon the constitutional rights of the 

person involved, or other certified persons; [¶] (8) The publicity or notoriety given to 

the conduct.” (Id., at p. 229; CCR, § 80302, subd. (a).) Not all Morrison factors need to 

be examined, only the pertinent ones. (West Valley-Mission Comm. College Dist. v. 

Concepcion (1993) 16 Cal.App.4th 1766, 1777.) 

9. 

The Commission has promulgated regulations to address circumstances 

where a licensee suffers from a mental defect or disability. According to those 

regulations, the Commission cannot institute an administrative hearing solely because 

a licensee is suffering from a “defect of mind” unless there is probable cause to 

conclude the licensee’s condition constitutes a health hazard to students or colleagues 

or the disease or defect prevents the licensee from performing the duties authorized 

by her credential. (CCR, § 80309, subd. (a).) If adverse action is taken because of the 

disability, such adverse action is limited to the duration of the actual disability. (Id., 

subd. (b).) If the evidence shows a licensee committed acts or omissions which, but for 

the reasonably probable existence of some mental defect or disability, demonstrate 

unfitness to teach, the Committee may require and the licensee must agree to submit 

26 

to an examination by a designated board certified licensed psychiatrist. The examining 

psychiatrist is responsible for submitting an expert report as to whether “the licensee 

is able to perform the duties authorized by the credential held; and if not so able, the 

probable duration of and severity of the disability.” (Id., subd. (c).) 

Analysis 

CAUSES FOR ADVERSE ACTION 

10. 

Complainant proved by clear and convincing evidence respondent 

allowed students to drink alcohol and smoke marijuana at her home, engaged in an 

inappropriate relationship with a student, and crossed professional boundaries in her 

social relations with students. (Factual Findings 9–16.) Such conduct constitutes 

unprofessional conduct, immoral conduct, and acts of moral turpitude under Code 

sections 44421 and 44345 as alleged in the First, Second, and Fourth Causes for 

Discipline in the First Amended Accusation. (Legal Conclusions 1–5.) 

11. 

Complainant did not prove by clear and convincing evidence respondent 

is not fit, not adapted to, or unsuitable for teaching because of temperamental defects 

or inadequacies as alleged in the Third Cause for Discipline in the First Amended 

Accusation. Respondent established by clear and convincing evidence her misconduct 

was caused by a mental illness that she has since brought under control. (Factual 

Findings 17–48; Legal Conclusions 1, 6.) 

FITNESS TO TEACH 

12.  Discipline of a teacher’s credential on the grounds of unprofessional 

conduct, immoral conduct, or conduct involving moral turpitude requires proof the 

27 

misconduct renders the teacher unfit to teach. (Morrison, supra, 1 Cal.3d at pp. 229–

230.) The Morrison factors apply to respondent as follows: 

A. 

The likelihood the conduct may have adversely affected students, fellow 

teachers, or the educational community, and the degree of such adversity anticipated. 

Students L.B., J.A., T.W., and the other students who were permitted to drink alcohol 

and smoke marijuana at respondent’s home were directly and adversely affected by 

respondent’s conduct during the summer of 2019. Respondent acted irresponsibly, 

exercised poor judgment, crossed professional boundaries intended to protect her 

students, encouraged unsafe conduct, and conducted an inappropriate relationship 

with a student. (Factual Findings 9–16.) Respondent’s conduct also potentially 

adversely affected classroom teaching by causing distracting conversations as well as 

distrust and disrespect for the teaching process. Respondent’s conduct was particularly 

egregious considering the high-risk status of many of her students and their already 

precarious relationship with the educational community. However, it is difficult to 

gauge the degree of such adversity. The students involved all appeared to be 

graduating or super seniors, there is no evidence the video was widely circulated, no 

parents complained, the only teacher complaint concerned student T.W.’s 

conversations about respondent’s personal information, and respondent quickly 

resigned after being placed on administrative leave, minimizing the impact of her 

actions on the Bowman community. 

B. 

The proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct. Respondent’s 

misconduct occurred during summer school of 2019, four years ago. Four years is not 

so remote in time that the conduct in question should be dismissed or excused. 

C. 

The type of credential held by the person involved. Respondent’s 

credentials authorize her to teach students in grades 12 and below. Courts have found 

28 

that elementary and middle school students are particularly impressionable. (Broney v. 

California Com. on Teacher Credentialing (2010) 184 Cal.App.4th 462.) In Broney, the 

court found “[G]iven the impressionable nature of elementary school students, and 

their need for appropriate adult role models, this factor weighs in favor of finding of 

unfitness to teach.” (Id. at p. 477.) 

D. 

The extenuating or aggravating circumstances surrounding the conduct. 

There are both aggravating and extenuating circumstances surrounding respondent’s 

conduct. In aggravation, respondent engaged in multiple acts of wrongdoing and her 

conduct endangered her students’ well-being. (Factual Findings 9–16; CCR, § 80300, 

subd. (b)(2), (b)(4).) In mitigation, respondent’s misconduct was entirely due to a then-

undiagnosed physical condition, which she has now successfully controlled with 

medication and therapy as affirmed by her medical team. (Factual Findings 17–48; 

CCR, § 80300, subd. (m)(3).) Respondent’s commitment to her treatment, her network 

of family support, and praise for her good character from her colleagues and current 

employer are additional factors in her favor. (CCR, § 80300, subd. (m)(4).) 

E. 

The praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the 

conduct. There is nothing praiseworthy about respondent’s misconduct. 

F. 

The likelihood of the recurrence of the questioned conduct. Respondent 

provided convincing evidence her prognosis is good and that the likelihood of 

recurrence of a future manic episode is low. Respondent has actively addressed the 

mental health issues that triggered the conduct. She is medication compliant, sees her 

medical team regularly, has a good support network consisting of family, friends, and 

medical personnel who are sensitive to any abnormal symptoms, and is vigilant 

regarding her health. 

29 

G. 

The extent to which disciplinary action may inflict an adverse impact or 

chilling effect upon the constitutional rights of the person involved, or other certified 

persons. Not applicable. 

H. 

The publicity or notoriety given to the conduct. No evidence was 

presented on the publicity or notoriety given to respondent’s misconduct. SI 

Osbourne’s report identified only four involved students. One teacher in her 

declaration referred to rumors regarding respondent’s conduct, but she did not 

discuss the extent, timing, or nature of the rumors. (Exhibit O, p. B131.) There is no 

evidence respondent’s conduct was reported in the media. The video of partying at 

respondent’s home did not depict respondent. It was also not made known how 

widely the video was disseminated. 

13. 

The foregoing factors show respondent engaged in egregious conduct 

that caused harm to her students and the educational community and demonstrate an 

unfitness to teach. Teachers are expected to exercise good judgment, respect 

professional boundaries, and keep their students safe. Respondent did not do that in 

the spring and summer of 2019. Cause for adverse action against respondent's 

teaching credentials therefore exists under Code sections 44421 and 44345. 

14. 

The circumstances surrounding respondent’s misconduct, however, do 

not compel the revocation of respondent's credentials to protect the public interest. 

The evidence convincingly demonstrated respondent’s misconduct was caused by a 

mental disability that for the past three years she has successfully addressed. And by 

all accounts, respondent is a dedicated and competent teacher who is functioning well 

teaching in a remote classroom. Respondent has shown meaningful rehabilitation by 

taking the necessary steps to ensure continued management and monitoring of her 

psychiatric condition. 

30 

15.  However, the seriousness of respondent’s misconduct and the recency of 

respondent’s psychiatric illness demands further monitoring. While respondent has 

excelled in teaching remotely, respondent’s entry into a regular classroom setting has 

not been tested. Nor has respondent been the subject of an objective and 

independent psychological evaluation assessing her fitness to teach. Accordingly, the 

facts established by clear and convincing evidence warrant placing respondent’s 

credentials on suspension, with the suspension to be removed only upon presentation 

to the Commission of satisfactory evidence that respondent is mentally fit to teach, in 

conformity with CCR section 80309, subdivision (c). (Legal Conclusion 9.) If respondent 

is found mentally fit to teach, the public interest will be adequately protected by the 

issuance of a properly conditioned probationary teaching credential. 

16. 

Complainant contended at hearing that respondent’s credential should 

be revoked because of the nature of her misconduct and the possibility respondent 

may experience a manic episode in the future. As noted above, while respondent’s 

conduct was harmful to her students, respondent’s evidence of mitigation and 

rehabilitation demonstrates revocation would be unduly punitive and unnecessary to 

protect the public. Regarding complainant’s second argument, complainant offered no 

medical, psychological, or scientific evidence demonstrating the recurrence of the kind 

of manic episode that triggered respondent’s misconduct is likely. Prediction of future 

conduct cannot be based only on “uninformed conjecture or speculation.” (Morrison, 

supra, 1 Cal.3d at 237; see also Bragdon v. Abbott (1998) 524 U.S. 624, 649 [“Risk 

assessment must be based on medical or other objective evidence.”].) Moreover, 

nothing in the Code states that persons with mental illnesses adequately controlled 

with medication are ineligible to teach. (See also California Code of Regulations, title 2, 

section 11067 [[I]t is no defense [to a discrimination claim] that an individual with a 

disability has a condition or a disease with a future risk, so long as the condition or 

31 

disease does not presently interfere with his or her ability to perform the job in a 

manner that will not endanger the individual with a disability or others.”]) 

17. 

Respondent’s assertion that any discipline imposed against respondent’s 

credentials based on her misconduct constitutes unlawful discrimination under Code 

sections 44337 and 44338 as well as under Government Code section 11135 and CCR 

section 80309, is similarly unavailing. Code section 44337 and Government Code 

section 11135, prohibit discrimination against any teacher based on a disability; Code 

section 44338 prohibits denying a teacher the right to teach because of a disability, as 

long as the teacher “does not pose a direct threat of substantial harm to the health or 

safety of other individuals.” CCR section 80309 prohibits commencing an 

administrative action against a teacher based solely on a disability. Thus, under these 

statutes and regulations, the prohibited discrimination is based on the individual’s 

disability and not on the individual's conduct. 

18.  Here, however, complainant seeks to discipline respondent based on her 

misconduct, not on her disability. Indeed, it was not made clear whether the 

Committee was even aware of respondent’s bipolar 1 disorder diagnosis before 

making its findings. Except in the case of violence, California courts are silent on 

whether conduct resulting from a disability is considered to be part of the disability 

rather than a separate basis for termination. (See Wills v. Superior Court (2011) 195 

Cal.App.4th 143, 161–166 [acknowledging “no reported California case addresses 

whether [the Fair Employment and Housing Act] equates disability-caused misconduct 

with the disability itself” but finding an employer is not required to retain an employee 

who threatens or commits acts of violence even if such conduct results from a 

disability].) Thus, taking adverse action against respondent’s credentials for her 

misconduct does not constitute unlawful discrimination. 

32 

19. 

Based on the circumstances of this case, the order below is consistent 

with the statutes and regulations governing respondent’s conduct and sufficient to 

protect the educational community. 

ORDER 

The credentials issued to respondent Stacey Lee Weatherman are revoked. 

However, the revocation is stayed and respondent is placed on probation for three 

years subject to the following terms and conditions: 

1. 

Severability Clause: Each condition of probation contained herein is a 

separate and distinct condition. If any condition of probation, or part thereof, or any 

application thereof, is declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be 

unenforceable in whole or in part, or to any extent, the remaining conditions of 

probation, and each of them, and all other applications thereof, shall not be affected. 

Each condition of probation herein shall be separately valid and enforceable to the 

fullest extent permitted by law. 

2. 

Suspension: Respondent’s teaching credential shall be suspended for a 

period of 60 days beginning on the effective date of this decision. 

3. 

Psychiatric Examination: Within 60 days of the effective date of this 

Decision, and on whatever periodic basis thereafter as may be required by the 

Commission or its designee, respondent shall undergo and complete a psychiatric 

evaluation (and psychological testing, if deemed necessary) by a Commission-

appointed board certified psychiatrist. The psychiatrist shall furnish a written report to 

the Commission or its designee regarding respondent's judgment and ability to 

function independently and safely as a teacher and such other information as the 

33 

Commission may require. Respondent shall pay the cost of such evaluation. 

Respondent shall execute a Release of Information authorizing the evaluator to release 

all information to the Commission. Respondent shall comply with all restrictions or 

conditions recommended by the evaluating psychiatrist. 

Respondent shall not work as a credentialed teacher until notified by the 

Commission or its designee that respondent is fit to teach safely. 

4. 

New Credentials Subject to Order: Any new credential issued by the 

Commission to respondent during the period of probation shall be subject to this 

order, and respondent shall be subject to the same terms and conditions of probation 

with respect to any such new credentials, as set forth herein. 

5. 

Compliance with Probation: Respondent shall fully comply with each and 

every term and condition of probation. During the entire period of probation, 

Respondent shall submit quarterly declarations under penalty of perjury, on forms 

provided by the Commission, stating whether there has been full compliance with the 

terms and conditions of probation. Respondent shall submit a full and detailed 

description of any violation of any term or condition of probation on the quarterly 

declaration. Respondent shall submit the quarterly declarations not later than 10 days 

after the end of each quarter which, for purposes of this term and condition, are: 

March 31st, June 30th, September 30th, and December 31st. 

6. 

Cooperation with Commission: During the entire period of probation, 

respondent shall fully cooperate with the Commission in its monitoring and 

investigation of respondent’s compliance with probation. 

/// 

34 

7. 

Interviews with Commission: During the entire period of probation, 

respondent shall be available for interviews either in person or by telephone, with or 

without prior notice, with the Commission. 

8. 

Notification: Within five days of the effective date of this order, 

respondent shall provide a true and correct copy of this decision, together with a true 

and correct copy of the First Amended Accusation, to respondent’s employer as 

defined by the California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80300, subdivision (j), if 

any, and to respondent’s immediate supervisor at that employer. Within five days of 

complying with this notification requirement, respondent shall submit proof of 

compliance to the Commission. 

If respondent changes employment at any time during probation, respondent 

shall again comply with this notification requirement within seven days of accepting 

new employment and shall again submit proof of compliance to the Commission, as 

required herein, within five days of complying with this notification requirement. 

Respondent shall comply with this notification requirement, and proof of compliance, 

as described herein, each and every time respondent changes employment during the 

probationary period. 

Within seven days of this order, respondent shall also notify the Commission in 

writing of the name and address of the current employer with whom respondent has 

contracted or is otherwise engaged to perform education services. Respondent shall 

provide this same information to the Commission within seven days of any change in 

employment and, in addition, shall also provide a full and complete explanation of the 

facts and circumstances surrounding the cessation of employment with the former 

employer. 

35 

9. 

Maintain Active, Current Credentials: During the entire period of 

probation, respondent shall maintain active, current credentials with the Commission, 

including during any period of suspension. 

10.  Maintain Current Contact Information: Within seven days of the effective 

date of this order, respondent shall notify the Commission of a current mailing 

address, current email address, and current telephone number where voicemail or text 

messages may be left. Within 72 hours of any change of mailing address, email 

address, or telephone number, respondent shall notify the Commission of the new 

mailing address, email address, and telephone number. 

11.  Obey All Laws: Respondent shall obey all federal, state, and local laws, 

including all laws governing the education profession in California, and shall remain in 

full compliance with all court orders, criminal probation, or parole, and shall make all 

court-ordered payments. 

Except for minor traffic infractions, within 72 hours of any incident resulting in 

respondent’s arrest, the filing of any criminal charges, or citation issued, respondent 

shall submit a full and detailed description of the incident to the Commission. For 

purposes of this condition, a “minor traffic infraction” includes only traffic violations 

which are punishable by a maximum fine of $250, and do not subject the offender to 

incarceration or probation. (See Veh. Code, § 42001; Pen. Code, §§ 17, subd. (d), 19.6, 

and 19.8.) 

Within 72 hours of receiving notice of any violation of any court order, criminal 

probation or parole, or failure to make any court-ordered payment, respondent shall 

submit a full and detailed description of the incident to the Commission. 

/// 

36 

To permit monitoring of respondent’s compliance with this condition, 

respondent shall ensure that fingerprints are on file with the Commission. 

Respondents residing outside of California can also comply with this fingerprint 

requirement by submitting, within 30 days of the effective date of this order, two 

fingerprint cards (FD-258) and payment of the additional applicable fingerprint fee. 

12. 

Violation of Probation: Failure to fully comply with any term or condition 

of probation, or any part thereof, shall constitute a violation of probation. If 

respondent violates any term or condition of probation, or any part thereof, in any 

respect, the matter will be referred to the Office of the Attorney General for 

preparation of a Petition to Revoke Probation. After giving respondent notice and an 

opportunity to be heard, the Commission may revoke probation and impose the order 

that was stayed, i.e., revocation of respondent’s credentials. If a Petition to Revoke 

Probation is filed against respondent during probation, or the Attorney General’s 

Office has been asked to prepare a Petition to Revoke Probation against respondent, 

the Commission shall have continuing jurisdiction until the matter is final, and the 

period of probation shall be automatically extended until the matter is final. 

Respondent’s credentials may also be subject to immediate suspension for any 

specified violation of probation as provided in this order. If respondent does not 

comply with any part of a probation condition that includes a consequence of 

suspension for failure to comply, the Commission will notify respondent in writing that 

respondent’s credentials are immediately suspended. Thereafter, the suspension of 

respondent’s credentials shall not be lifted until the effective date of a final decision of 

the Commission on a Petition to Revoke Probation to be filed against respondent. 

If a Petition to Revoke Probation is not filed against respondent within 30 days 

of issuance of the written notification from the Commission to respondent that 

37 

respondent’s credentials are immediately suspended, or respondent is not provided 

with an administrative hearing within 30 days of a written request for a hearing, unless 

respondent stipulates to a later hearing, the suspension shall be dissolved. The 

deadlines established herein shall be computed pursuant to the provisions of sections 

12 through 12c of the Code of Civil Procedure. Where an original suspension has 

dissolved, nothing shall prohibit issuance of another suspension for any additional or 

subsequent violation by respondent as a condition of probation. 

13. 

Completion of Probation: Upon completion of probation, respondent’s 

credentials shall be fully restored. 

DATE: 

CINDY F. FORMAN 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings 

38 

06/30/2023 
 
