BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Accusation and Statement of Issues 

Against: 

Adrian Israel Belcher, Respondent. 

Agency Case No. 2-241439159 

OAH No. 2022070652 (Accusation-Primary) 

OAH No. 2022070655 (Statement of Issues-Secondary) 

PROPOSED DECISION 

David B. Rosenman, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings 

(OAH), State of California, heard this matter by videoconference on November 17, 

2022. 

Complainant was represented by Megan Cross, Deputy Attorney General. 

Respondent Adrian Israel Belcher was present and represented himself.

Oral and documentary evidence was received. The record closed and the matter 

was submitted for decision on November 17, 2022.

The matters were consolidated by an Order issued on July 22, 2022. 

Complainant agreed a single Proposed Decision could be issued. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS

Jurisdictional Matters 

1.

The California Commission on Teacher Credentialing (Commission) issued 

to respondent a 30-Day Substitute Teaching Permit on September 27, 2017, which 

expired on October 1, 2018. The Permit was reissued on October 13, 2018, which 

expired on November 1, 2019. The Permit was reissued on November 1, 2019, which 

expired on November 1, 2020. The Commission issued to respondent a Provisional 

Internship Permit on August 2, 2018, which expired on September 1, 2019. There was 

no evidence of prior discipline against these credentials. 

2. 

On March 31, 2021, respondent submitted to the Commission an 

application for a 30-Day Substitute Teaching Permit. 

3. 

Complainant Mary Vixie Sandy, Ed.D., brought the Accusation and 

Statement of Issues in her official capacity as Executive Director of the Commission.

4. 

After receiving the Accusation and Statement of Issues, respondent filed 

a Notice of Defense and requested an administrative hearing. 

5. 

All jurisdictional requirements have been met. 

Criminal Convictions and Underlying Circumstances 

6. 

On January 3, 2019, respondent was convicted, on his plea of nolo 

contendere, of violating Vehicle Code section 23152, subdivision (b), driving under the 

influence of alcohol with a blood alcohol content (BAC) of 0.08 percent or greater, a 

misdemeanor. (

, San Bernardino Superior Court, 2019, case no. 

MV118012095.) Imposition of sentence was suspended and respondent was placed on 

2

summary probation for three years on terms and conditions, including that he serve 

four days in county jail (with credit for four days), pay fines and assessments, complete 

a first offender alcohol education program, not drive a vehicle with a measurable 

amount of alcohol in his system, and submit to a blood/breath alcohol test upon 

request of an officer. 

7. 

Respondent filed proof of completion of the alcohol education program 

on January 28, 2019, and paid the fines and assessments. 

8. 

The underlying circumstances of the criminal conviction relate to 

respondent’s actions at 12:23 a.m. on June 2, 2018, when a Sheriff’s Deputy observed 

the vehicle respondent was driving make a left turn without stopping for a red light, 

and that the vehicle’s taillights were inoperable. When the Deputy noticed the odor of 

alcohol and asked respondent if he had been drinking, respondent replied he had 

consumed four beers. Respondent could not successfully perform field sobriety tests. 

Preliminary alcohol screens yielded results of 0.16 and 0.15 percent BAC. Two later 

breath tests both yielded results of 0.13 percent BAC. 

9. 

In a letter received by the Commission on September 14, 2021, 

respondent explained he was out with friends “after a long first year of substituting, 

and felt the need to relieve some stress, . . . [and] did not use sound judgment and 

decided to keep drinking” after he left a restaurant, went to a bar, and decided to drive 

home. “I completely regret that whole night and the decisions I made.” (Exhibit 9, p. 

A104.) “But in all honesty, I still did not learn my lesson as it happened again a few 

years later.” (

.) 

10.  On June 23, 2021, respondent was convicted, on his plea of nolo 

contendere, of violating Vehicle Code section 23152, subdivision (b), driving under the 

3

influence of alcohol with a BAC of 0.08 percent or greater, and Penal Code section 243, 

subdivision (b), battery on a police officer, both misdemeanors. (

, San 

Bernardino Superior Court, 2021, case no. 20CR07059.) Imposition of sentence was 

suspended and respondent was placed on summary probation for three years on 

terms and conditions, including that he serve 30 days in county jail (with credit for two

days), pay fines and assessments, complete a second offender 18-month alcohol 

education program, not drive a vehicle with a measurable amount of alcohol in his 

system, and submit to a blood/breath alcohol test upon request of an officer.

11. 

Respondent has not commenced the alcohol education program. He 

testified he does not have the funds needed to start the program.

12. 

The underlying circumstances of the criminal conviction relate to 

respondent’s actions at 10:01 p.m. on September 23, 2020, when a Sheriff’s Deputy 

observed the vehicle respondent was driving swerve several times, then stop at a stop 

sign for an unusually long time, and then make a right turn at a red light without 

coming to a full stop. The Deputy was joined by a California Highway Patrol officer, 

who observed respondent demonstrating objective signs of intoxication. When the 

officer noticed the odor of alcohol and asked respondent if he had been drinking, 

respondent denied drinking. Respondent could not successfully perform field sobriety 

tests. Preliminary alcohol screens yielded results of 0.154 and 0.158 percent BAC. After 

agreeing to take a breath test, respondent then refused. A warrant was obtained, and a 

sample of respondent’s blood was taken. There is no evidence of the BAC of the blood 

sample. Respondent was placed in a patrol car and, when the officer went to secure 

the seatbelt, respondent spit on the officer’s arm. 

13. 

In his letter to the Commission, respondent explained he was in Santa 

Barbara celebrating a friend’s birthday and had too much to drink. He wrote: “This 

4

time, I did learn my lesson as the consequences have been more severe and 

embarrassing as well.” (Exhibit 9, p. A104.) Respondent had to wear an ankle monitor 

at home and at work that monitored his alcohol intake. He had to explain the situation 

to his employer and family. He also was ordered to complete a house arrest program. 

“So I feel this second time around I have learned my lesson and do not intend on 

drinking and driving again as I know of the harm I can cause myself or others. I have 

been doing much better and have been using better judgment when I go out with 

friends.” (

.) In his letter and his testimony at the hearing, respondent did not 

address spitting on the police officer or the conviction for battery.

Committee of Credentials 

14. 

The Commission’s Committee of Credentials determined probable cause 

exists to recommend respondent’s credentials be revoked and his application be 

denied. Although it is alleged this action occurred at a meeting in December 2021, the 

Findings of the Committee of Credentials is undated and there is no evidence of the 

meeting. (Exhibit 4.) These Findings state: “The Committee finds that there is a close 

relationship between the misconduct and Respondent’s ability and/or fitness to 

perform the duties required for certificated services and thereby supports the 

disciplinary recommendation” for revocation of respondent’s credentials and denial of 

his application. (

. at p. A58.) The Findings include a summary of the arrest reports 

and court outcomes, but do not explain the reasoning behind the conclusion there is a 

“close relationship between the misconduct and Respondent’s ability and/or fitness” to 

teach. 

/// 

/// 

5

Alleged Causes for Discipline and Denial of Application

15.

In the Accusation, complainant alleges respondent’s credentials should 

be disciplined for unprofessional conduct, immoral conduct, evident unfitness for 

service, and persistent refusal to obey laws and duties of a school district employee, all 

pursuant to Education Code (Code) section 44421, and acts of moral turpitude and 

demonstrating an addiction to alcohol, pursuant to Code sections 44421 and 44345, 

subdivisions (c) and (e). In the Statement of Issues, complainant alleges respondent’s 

application should be denied for demonstrating an addiction to alcohol and for acts of 

moral turpitude, pursuant to Code section 44345, subdivisions (c) and (e). 

Respondent’s Background, Explanation, and Other Relevant Evidence 

16. 

Respondent is 29 years old. He started teaching in the 2017-2018 school 

year and last taught in the 2019-2020 school year. He submitted five letters from 

teachers, many of whom were his teachers, and for whom he later served as a 

substitute teacher. These are described in more detail below.

17.

From March 2021 to September 2022 respondent worked as a front desk 

agent at a Holiday Inn hotel. He was laid off and has not worked since. He did not earn 

much money in this position.

18.

Respondent testified credibly he began drinking in his early 20’s and was 

a social drinker. He was influenced and encouraged by some family and friends. He 

stated it helped him to have fun and “to let loose.” After his first criminal conviction, 

despite completing the alcohol education program, he “did not learn the lessons.” He 

described the second criminal conviction as “a wake-up call.” Respondent learned a lot 

about himself. Respondent stopped drinking in January 2022 but relapsed around his 

birthday in July 2022. The relapse made him feel guilty, and he realized he did not 

6

enjoy drinking the alcohol. Respondent stated his use of alcohol never affected his 

actions in any classroom. 

19.

Respondent began attending meetings of Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) in 

late August 2022. He averages eight to ten meetings each week, and sometimes 

attends four meetings a day. He submitted attendance sheets to support this 

testimony. (Exhibits A, B.) Complainant objected the attendance sheets are hearsay, 

and the objections were sustained. However, in administrative proceedings, some 

hearsay evidence can be used to supplement or explain other evidence but may not by 

itself support a finding of fact. (Gov. Code, § 11513, subd. (d).) This is referred to as 

administrative hearsay. The attendance sheets confirm respondent’s attendance at 

numerous AA meetings and supplement and explain respondent’s testimony. 

20. 

Respondent stated the AA meetings helped him understand his reasons 

for drinking and helped change his view of alcohol and learn more about himself. He is 

currently working step four of the 12-step program but has not yet obtained a 

sponsor. He wants to be careful and selective in obtaining a sponsor, as he has seen 

some people in the program who have relapsed. Respondent is becoming more aware 

of his triggers and stays away from certain family and friends as a result. He is 

committed to abstaining from alcohol, and stated it is “a life-long process,” to learn 

what he can and get help. 

21. 

Respondent submitted five character-reference letters, received as 

administrative hearsay, and testified about the authors and some of the activities 

referenced in the letters. Elizabeth Alamo (Alamo) was respondent’s teacher in high 

school. Respondent has worked as a substitute for her class. Alamo wrote favorably of 

her impressions of respondent, both as a student and as a substitute teacher. (Exhibit 

C.) Respondent acknowledged he had not informed Alamo of his criminal convictions. 

7

22. Mary Brown (Brown) has taught for 23 years and had respondent as her 

student. Respondent was hired as a teacher at Brown’s school. Brown was proud of 

respondent’s performance, including his reliability and ability to connect with students. 

(Exhibit D.) Respondent testified he informed Brown of his criminal convictions.

23.  McGail Counts (Counts) is the chair of the special education department 

at a junior high school where respondent taught as a substitute for three years. She 

writes of his positive attitude in his work with general education students as well as 

students with disabilities and behavior difficulties. (Exhibit E.) Respondent testified he 

informed Counts of his criminal convictions. 

24. 

Dianah Edington (Edington) is an administrative assistant at the same 

junior high school and is aware respondent built good relationships with students, 

who showed him a high level of respect. She wrote respondent’s level of energy 

motivates others, and he is dedicated to teaching. (Exhibit F.) Respondent testified he 

informed Edington of his arrests. 

25. 

Erica Moeller (Moeller) is a teacher, AVID coordinator, and athletic 

director at the same junior high school where respondent worked as a substitute 

teacher. She writes he learns quickly, is eager to assist others, and has the innate 

ability to build relationships, foster camaraderie, and to champion the students. 

(Exhibit G.) Respondent testified he informed Moeller of his criminal convictions. 

26. 

Respondent was respectful of the proceedings and spoke with sincerity. 

He described his interest in helping others starting when he was a child, and his 

passion for acquiring the skills to be a better teacher. Respondent regrets the loss of 

the opportunity to work with students in the classroom. Respondent is grateful he did 

not injure himself or others while driving drunk and is regretful of those actions. He 

8

believes, as a result of his better understanding of himself and his issues with alcohol, 

God has revealed respondent’s purpose. Respondent is willing to comply with any 

reasonable requirements to return to teaching, including drug testing. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

1.

In the part of this proceeding based on the Accusation to impose 

discipline on respondent’s teaching credentials, complainant has the burden to prove 

its case by clear and convincing evidence to a reasonable certainty. (

(1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035.) Therefore, to 

impose discipline on respondent’s credentials, complainant is obligated to adduce 

evidence that is clear, explicit, and unequivocal—so clear as to leave no substantial 

doubt and sufficiently strong as to command the unhesitating assent of every 

reasonable mind. (

(1990) 224 Cal.App.3d 478.) Clear and 

convincing evidence has been defined as “[e]vidence of such convincing force that it 

demonstrates, in contrast to the opposing evidence, a high probability of the truth of the 

fact[s] for which it is offered as proof.” (Cal. Civil Jury Instructions [BAJI] 2.62; accord, 

(1997) 52 Cal.App.4th 820, 847.)

2. 

In the part of this proceeding based on the Statement of Issues to deny 

respondent’s application for a credential, the burden of proof is on respondent to 

establish by a preponderance of the evidence he is entitled to the credential that he seeks. 

(See 

(2000) 81 Cal.App.4th 1205; 

(2006) 139 Cal.App.4th 471, 476.) “‘Preponderance of the 

evidence means evidence that has more convincing force than that opposed to it.’ 

[Citations omitted.] . . . The sole focus of the legal definition of ‘preponderance’ in the 

phrase ‘preponderance of the evidence’ is on the 

of the evidence. The 

of 

9

evidence presented by each side is irrelevant.” (

(1990) 

226 Cal.App.3d 314, 324-325; italics in original.) Preponderance of the evidence means 

that “the evidence on one side outweighs, preponderates over, is more than, the evidence 

on the other side.” (

at p. 325.)

3. 

Pursuant to the Code, commencing with section 44000, and California 

Code of Regulations, title 5, commencing with section 80000 (Regulation), the 

Commission is responsible for credentialing teachers in public schools in California, 

including issuing credentials and taking adverse action against applicants and 

credential holders. “Adverse action” is defined in Regulation 80300, subdivision (a), as 

“a denial, a private admonition, public reproval, suspension or a revocation of one or 

more credentials.” Under Code section 44440, subdivision (c), the Commission has the 

authority to institute a disciplinary proceeding against a credential holder, suspend or 

revoke the credential, or issue a public reproval or private admonition against the 

credential holder. Regulation 80300, subdivision (t), provides that a suspension may be 

stayed “on condition of probation,” indicating that adverse action may also take the 

form of placing a credential on probation subject to terms.

4. 

Code section 44421 authorizes the Commission to take adverse action 

against an individual’s teaching credential for immoral conduct, unprofessional 

conduct, for “persistent defiance of, and refusal to obey, the laws regulating the duties 

of persons serving in the public school system,” for any cause that would warrant 

denial of an application, or for evidence unfitness for service. In this matter, all five

grounds are alleged. 

5. 

Under Code section 44345, the Commission may deny an application if 

the applicant is “addicted to the use of intoxicating beverages to excess” (subd. (c)) or 

has committed acts involving moral turpitude (subd. (e)). 

10 

6.

Language similar to some of these grounds is found in Code sections

authorizing a school district to terminate the employment of a teacher. For example, a 

teacher may be terminated for unprofessional conduct or for immoral conduct, under 

Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(1). Cases under this Code section have discussed 

and defined these bases for a teacher’s termination of employment and are instructive 

here to help define the bases for discipline or denial of a teaching credential. 

7. 

There is broad discretion in determining what constitutes unfitness to 

teach, in determining what constitutes immoral conduct, and in deciding whether the 

teacher should be sanctioned. (

 (1999) 20 

Cal.4th 327.) The proven conduct should be looked at in the aggregate. It is not 

necessary to determine if each and every act demonstrates unfitness; it is proper to 

examine the totality of the offensive conduct. “When the camel’s back is broken we 

need not weigh each straw in its load to see which one could have done the deed.” 

(

(1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1457.) 

8. 

“Immoral conduct,” pursuant to Code section 44932, subdivision (a)(1), has 

been defined to mean conduct that is willful, flagrant, or shameless, conduct showing 

moral indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the community, and as an 

inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public welfare. It is sometimes used as 

indicating a high degree of unfairness. (

 (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811 (

) Immoral conduct can be 

construed according to common usage. “The term ‘immoral’ has been defined generally 

as that which is hostile to the welfare of the general public and contrary to good morals. 

Immorality has not been confined to sexual matters, but includes conduct inconsistent 

with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; or as willful, 

11 

 
flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable 

members of the community, and as an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the 

public welfare.” (

Cal.App.3d 967, 972 (

).)

 (1970) 9 

9. 

The factual scenarios in 

, 

, and other cases are helpful in 

understanding the types of actions that can constitute “immoral conduct” and “evident 

unfitness for service” as bases to dismiss a teacher. By inference, these cases help in 

interpreting similar language regarding grounds to discipline teaching credentials. In 

, a teacher of an evening class was aware that when the number of students in 

a class was down to 15 for three successive evenings, the class would be automatically 

dropped and the teacher would lose her position. The teacher testified she falsified 

records by adding the names of three persons who were absent. Although the teacher 

argued that other teachers did the same and she did so “to expose the situation,” 

nevertheless her conduct was not justified and the evidence established “that the 

purpose of the falsification was to secure appellant’s continued employment. The 

evidence was clearly sufficient to support the findings” of immoral conduct. (

 179 Cal.App.2d at 811.) 

10.

In 

, dismissal was justified for a junior college teacher who used 

vulgar language and engaged in questionable acts in his classes. It was not necessarily 

each individual act or comment but, rather, the totality. The teacher tore out a 

loudspeaker in his classroom. He referred to the school’s bell system as sounding like 

a worn-out phonograph in a whorehouse. He warned Mexican American students of 

super-syphilis. He stated the district superintendent spent too much time licking up 

the school board and simulated licking the classroom wall with his tongue. Although 

he explained he meant “face licking,” the expression “means in common parlance 

12 

licking an entirely different portion of the anatomy” and was obviously so intended. 

(

9 Cal.App.3d at 974, 975.) The teacher also referred to the school walls 

looking as though someone had peed on them and then smeared them with baby 

crap. The court stated: “while it could be assumed that both male and female students 

of that age were familiar with the words used, a classroom, even on a junior college 

level, is not the time or the place for the use of such language.” (

) The different 

actions and statements were described as creating a dangerous situation 

(loudspeaker), bearing on his fitness to teach (whorehouse), humiliating and 

embarrassing to the Mexican American students and showing a lack of restraint and a 

tendency to vulgarity and bad taste (super-syphilis). The conduct was disruptive, an 

impairment of the teaching process, and not an example of the responsible dissent 

which should be fostered in the classroom (licking). “All of the incidents taken in the 

aggregate serve as a substantial basis for the trial court’s determination that the 

charges of ‘immoral conduct’ and ‘evident unfitness for service’ were true and 

constituted cause for dismissal.” (

) 

11. 

Under Code section 44421, it was not immoral conduct or unfitness for 

service for a college English teacher to use for illustrative purposes a poem containing 

obscenities, slang references to male and female sexual organs and to sexual activity, 

and profane references to Jehovah and Christ, and a brochure containing photographs 

of entwined nude couples suggesting sexual intercourse. (

(1972) 8 Cal.3d 206 

12. 

“Unprofessional conduct,” as used in Code section 44932, subdivision 

(a)(l), may be defined as conduct which violates the rules or ethical code of a 

profession or is such conduct that is unbecoming of a member of a profession in good 

standing. (

 (1953) 41 Cal.2d 546, 553 

13 

 
(

).) “A teacher . . . in the public school system is regarded by the public and pupils 

in the light of an exemplar, whose words and actions are likely to be followed by the 

children coming under her care and protection.” (

, 41 Cal.2d at p. 552; 

citations omitted.) In 

(1924) 

66 Cal.App. 157, 168, the Court noted: “[T]he teacher is entrusted with the custody of 

children and their high preparation for useful life. His habits, his speech, his good 

name, his cleanliness, the wisdom and propriety of his unofficial utterances, his 

associations, all are involved. His ability to inspire children and to govern them, his 

power as a teacher, and the character for which he stands, are of major concern in a 

teacher’s selection and retention. . . .”

13. 

g (2010) 184 

Cal.App.4th 462 (

) is particularly instructive. The teacher had three criminal 

convictions for driving under the influence (DUI) in 1987, 1997, and 2002. She applied 

for her teaching credential after the 1997 conviction. The Commission was aware of 

her (then) two DUI convictions and granted the credential. Her third conviction in 2002 

included her plea to driving with a 0.25 percent BAC, more than three times the legal 

limit. She was ordered to wear an ankle bracelet, which she wore in the classroom. The 

Commission determined Broney committed unprofessional conduct and her conduct 

indicated she was unfit to teach, and suspended her credentials for 60 days, stayed, 

and placed her credential on probation for three years. As noted in more detail below, 

the court examined the various factors identified in caselaw and a regulation to 

determine if the discipline was justified. 

14. 

Respondent here was convicted twice of DUI, circumstances that support 

the conclusion these were acts of moral turpitude. In 

 (1994), 29 

Cal.App.4th 1746, the court concluded continuing to drive while intoxicated despite 

14 

the knowledge of the serious risks it imposes upon other drivers is indicative of a 

“conscious indifference or ‘I don't care attitude’ concerning the ultimate 

consequences” of the activity (

 (1993) 6 Cal. 4th 1199, 1208) from 

which one can certainly infer a “depravity in the private and social duties which a man 

owes to his fellowmen, or to society in general, contrary to the accepted and 

customary rule of right and duty between man and man. (

(1988) 

200 Cal.App.3d 82, 87).” (

29 Cal.App.4th at p. 1757.) Of note, 

respondent committed his second DUI while on probation for his first DUI. Battery on 

a police officer is also a crime of moral turpitude. (

 (1989) 209 

Cal.App.3d 849.) 

15. 

By virtue of his criminal convictions, respondent has committed acts of 

moral turpitude. Such acts also constitute immoral conduct and unprofessional 

conduct.

16.

Complainant did not establish any particular law “regulating the duties of 

persons serving in the public school system” which respondent either persistently

defied or refused to obey, as stated in Code section 44421. No cause for suspension or 

revocation has been established for this alleged violation.

17.

Complainant did not offer any evidence respondent was addicted to 

alcohol except for two instances of DUI, the first in June 2018 when respondent 

admitted drinking four beers and his highest BAC was 0.16 percent, twice the legal 

limit, and the second in September 2020 when his highest BAC was 0.158 percent, 

close to twice the legal limit. Addiction to alcohol is a recognized medical diagnosis. 

These two incidents of DUI are insufficient to establish respondent is addicted to 

alcohol.

15 

18.

Before the Commission may take action against a credential, it is required 

to establish respondent’s conduct is related to his fitness to teach. (

(1969) 1 Cal.3d 214 (

).) Evident unfitness for service is 

both a separate basis to impose discipline on a teaching credential, and also must be 

established before immoral conduct, unprofessional conduct, or an act of moral 

turpitude can be found as a basis for discipline. In 

, the California Supreme 

Court examined a teacher’s non-criminal consensual homosexual relationship, with no 

connection to his position as a teacher, and concluded there was an insufficient nexus 

between the misconduct and his teaching credential. Therefore, the teacher’s 

credential could not be disciplined. Some of the factors used in this determination, 

known as the 

factors, are now included in Regulation 80302 relating to 

investigations by the Committee. Only the pertinent factors need to be analyzed. 

(

1776.)  

 (1993) 16 Cal.App.4th 

19. 

The eight 

factors are applied here as follows: 

(a) The likelihood that the conduct may have adversely affected students, 

fellow teachers, or the educational community, and the degree of such adversity 

anticipated. Complainant argued respondent wore his court-ordered ankle bracelet in 

the classroom, a factor found in 

 to support adverse effects on students or the 

educational community. Here, respondent wore the ankle bracelet during his work at a 

hotel. Further, the only evidence teachers and members of the educational community 

were aware of respondent’s criminal convictions came from respondent’s having told 

them. These persons nevertheless wrote letters of support for respondent. There was 

insufficient evidence of any adverse effect of respondent’s criminal conduct on 

students, teachers, or the educational community. 

16 

 
(b) The proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct. Respondent’s 

DUI in 2018 resulted in a criminal conviction in 2019. His DUI and battery on a police 

officer in 2020 resulted in criminal convictions in 2021. These are quite recent. 

(c) The type of credential held or applied for by the person involved. 

Respondent used his credentials, and the one for which he applied, to teach in 

elementary school and junior high school. As noted in 

, involving a fifth-grade 

teacher, children of that age are impressionable, and her multiple alcohol-related 

convictions were a serious concern. The same is true for respondent.

(d) The extenuating or aggravating circumstances surrounding the 

conduct. In 

, the court found an aggravating factor was her 0.25 percent BAC in 

her 2002 DUI. Respondent’s BAC’s were not quite as high. However, his battery on a 

police officer is of concern, as was his several denials of drinking when arrested in 

2020 and his failure to begin the 18-month alcohol education program. Extenuation is 

found in that respondent accepted responsibility, expressed remorse for his actions, 

and has begun to seek support by recently attending multiple AA meetings.

(e) The praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives resulting in 

the conduct. There is no perceived praiseworthiness in the criminal acts established by 

the evidence.

(f) The likelihood of the recurrence of the questioned conduct. 

Recurrence is likely, given respondent completed the first alcohol education program, 

did not attempt sobriety until January 2022, and relapsed in July 2022. He has not 

started the court-ordered 18-month alcohol education program and does not yet have 

a sponsor in AA. While it is hoped the conduct will not recur, respondent needs a 

17 

 
 
longer track record of sobriety and a well-established network of support to give 

reasonable assurances of continued success in his rehabilitation. 

(g) The extent to which disciplinary action may inflict an adverse impact 

or chilling effect upon the constitutional rights of the person involved, or other 

certified persons. Respondent did not offer any evidence to establish any 

constitutional right of his that will be impacted adversely by this matter. 

(h) The publicity or notoriety given to the conduct. There was no 

evidence of publicity or notoriety related to the criminal convictions. 

20.  Here, there is sufficient evidence of a connection or nexus between 

respondent’s criminal acts and his ability to teach. Complainant established by clear 

and convincing evidence respondent’s misconduct has a direct nexus to his credential 

and the profession of teaching. Adverse action against respondent’s credential 

therefore is warranted, as well as denial of his application. 

21. 

There is cause to suspend or revoke respondent’s teaching credentials for 

violating Code section 44421, for unprofessional conduct, immoral conduct, or 

evidence unfitness for service, and under Code sections 44421 and 44345 for acts of 

moral turpitude, as set forth in Factual Findings 1 through 26 and Legal Conclusions 1 

through 20. 

22. 

There is insufficient evidence of any cause to suspend or revoke 

respondent’s teaching credentials for violating Code section 44421, for persistent 

defiance of, and refusal to obey, the laws, regulations, and duties of a person serving 

the public school system, as set forth in Factual Findings 1 through 26 and Legal 

Conclusion 16. 

18 

 
 
23.

There is insufficient evidence of any cause to suspend or revoke 

respondent’s teaching credentials for violating Code sections 44421 and 44345, 

subdivision (c), for demonstrating an addiction to the use of alcohol to excess, as set 

forth in Factual Findings 1 through 26 and Legal Conclusion 17. 

24. 

Rehabilitation requires a consideration of those offenses from which one 

has allegedly been rehabilitated. (

 (1987) 43 Cal.3d 1041.) 

Rehabilitation is a state of mind, and the law looks with favor upon rewarding with the 

opportunity to serve one who has achieved reformation and regeneration. (

. at p. 

1058.) The absence of a prior disciplinary record is a mitigating factor. (

 (1984) 36 Cal.3d 116, 132, fn. 10.) Remorse and cooperation are mitigating factors.

(

(1989) 48 Cal.3d 284, 296.) While a candid admission of misconduct 

and full acknowledgment of wrongdoing may be a necessary step in the rehabilitation 

process, it is only a first step. A truer indication of rehabilitation is presented if an 

individual demonstrates by sustained conduct over an extended period of time that he 

is once again fit to practice. (

(1981) 30 Cal.3d 312.) 

25. 

As applied here, respondent accepted responsibility for his actions and 

expressed remorse. He has begun to undertake actions to support his rehabilitation. 

Attendance at AA meetings and sobriety are positive steps for which respondent is 

commended. However, respondent has not begun the court-ordered 18-month 

second offender alcohol program. The court-ordered probation will continue until at 

least June 2024. Respondent attempted sobriety in January 2022 only to relapse in July 

2022. Respondent has not yet chosen an AA sponsor and did not testify to any support 

network to assist him in maintaining sobriety and recovery. While establishing a 

positive attitude, respondent does not yet have a sufficient record of positive action to 

allow him to maintain his credentials or acquire a new credential. 

19 

ORDER

1.

The 30-Day Substitute Teaching Permits previously issued to respondent 

Adrian Israel Belcher are revoked.

2.

The application of respondent Adrian Israel Belcher for a 30-Day 

Substitute Teaching Permit submitted on March 31, 2021, is denied.

DATE:

DAVID B. ROSENMAN

Administrative Law Judge

Office of Administrative Hearing

20

