BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Amended Statement of Issues against: 

SAMUEL KWAKU AGYEI-FOSU GODMAN, 

Respondent. 

Agency Case No. 2-169229311 

OAH No. 2022030657 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Eileen Cohn, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings (OAH), 

State of California, heard this matter by videoconference on May 20, 2022 and 

December 8, 2022. 

Diana Petikyan, Deputy Attorney General, represented Complainant Mary Vixie 

Sandy, Ed. D., Executive Director, Commission on Teacher Credentialing (Commission), 

State of California. Respondent Samuel Kwaku Agyei-Fosu Godman represented 

himself. 

Oral and documentary evidence was received. On May 20, 2022, the matter was 

continued due to Respondent’s pending Writ of Administrative Mandate (Writ) before 

the Superior Court of California (San Bernardino County, Case No. CIVSB220638). At 

the time of the continued hearing date of December 8, 2022, the Judge in Case No. 

CIVSB220638 had issued a tentative decision and Proposed Judgment Denying 

Petition for Writ of Mandate, which was marked and admitted as Exhibit A and ordered 

Complainant to prepare a proposed judgment. At the conclusion of the administrative 

hearing on December 8, 2022, the record was left open for the parties to file a copy of 

the Superior Court final judgment and for the parties to supplement their oral closing 

arguments with written closing briefs addressing the final judgment in Case No. 

CIVSB220638. Complainant filed the Notice of Entry of Judgment and Final Judgement 

Denying Petition for Writ of Mandate which incorporated by reference the tentative, 

now final, decision of the Judge, which was marked and admitted as Exhibit 13. The 

parties elected not to supplement their oral closing arguments with written closing 

briefs. 

2022. 

The record closed and the matter was submitted for decision on January 23, 

SUMMARY 

Respondent presented to the Commission an Application for Credential 

Authorizing Public School Service, Multiple Subject Teaching Credential (Elementary 

Teaching) (Application) after the Commission had recently revoked Respondent’s Clear 

Designated Subjects Adult Education Teaching Credential: Full Time, and Clear 

Crosscultural, Language and Academic Certificate. Respondent filed a Petition for Writ 

of the Commission’s decision to revoke his previous license. The Writ was denied. 

Respondent offered no new evidence to support his Application and the issuance of a 

new credential after the revocation of his prior credential and certificate. As such, 

Respondent’s Application is denied. 

2 

 
FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Jurisdictional Matters 

1. 

On July 20, 2020, the Commission received Respondent’s Application for 

Credential Authorizing Public School Service, Multiple Subject Teaching Credential 

(Elementary Teaching) (Application). Respondent certified under penalty of perjury the 

truthfulness of all statements, answers, and representations in the Application on July 

2, 2020. (Ex. 11.) 

2. 

During its May 19-21, 2021 meeting, the Committee of Credentials of the 

Commission found probable cause to recommend denial of Respondent’s Application 

based upon its findings which are incorporated by reference herein. (Ex. 12.) During its 

July 21-23, 2021 meeting the Committee of Credentials of the Commission denied 

Respondent’s request for reconsideration because it determined Respondent failed to 

provide new and relevant information warranting reconsideration pursuant to 

California Code of Regulations, title 5 (Regulations), section 80315. (Ibid.) The 

Commission adopted the recommendations and findings of the Committee of 

Credentials. Respondent timely requested an administrative hearing. 

3. 

On March 7, 2022 Complainant filed and served the Statement of Issues 

pursuant to Education Code (Code) section 44242.5, subdivision (c)(3)(B). On April 15, 

2022, Complainant filed and served a First Amended Statement of Issues which was 

deemed controverted and subject to Respondent’s Notice of Defense. All jurisdictional 

requirements have been satisfied for this matter to proceed to hearing. 

/// 

/// 

3 

 
Previous Decision and Judgement on Petition for Writ of Mandate 

4. 

The Commission’s decision to deny Respondent’s Application was based 

upon the same factual findings set forth in OAH Case No. 2021041006, Agency Case 

No. 2-49712480, Jennifer Russell, Administrative Law Judge, presiding, adopted by the 

Commission, as its Decision & Order, with minor exceptions unrelated to the material 

findings for cause, on February 18, 2022. (Ex. 3.) 

5. 

By its Decision & Order effective March 20, 2022, the Commission 

revoked Respondent’s Clear Designated Subjects Adult Education Teaching Credential: 

Full Time, and Clear Crosscultural, Language and Academic Certificate. (Ex. 3.) 

6. 

The material factual findings of the Decision & Order have not changed 

or been modified over time. By clear and convincing evidence, the Commission found 

Respondent violated the school district’s Positive Behavior Policy requiring teachers to 

abstain from harmful or humiliating conduct when addressing the behaviors of 

students already confronting traumatic situations in their daily lives in two incidents 

involving six-grade students and a fifth-grade student. The incidents were described as 

follows: 

17.  On November 28, 2018, respondent was the 

substitute sixth grade teacher in room D3 at the District’s 

Del Vallejo Middle School. The students were loud and 

talkative during classroom instruction. Student A.S. 

engaged one of her classmates in simulated fighting. 

Respondent directed A.S. and several other students to 

kneel in front of the classroom. The students “got mad.” 

They told respondent, “That’s nasty.” 

4 

 
A.S. reported the incident to her parents, who in turn 

requested an investigation of the matter. 

25.  On February 7, 2019, respondent was the substitute 

fifth grade teacher in Room D108 at the District’s Bing 

Wong Elementary School. At some point, the students 

became restless and unruly. The principal assigned an 

additional substitute teacher to assist respondent. The 

students were calmed, and respondent resumed instruction. 

Student R.O. approached and stood in front of respondent 

contorting his face to resemble the Joker. Respondent told 

R.O. “not to do that to any teacher.” Respondent also told 

R.O., “If you were my son, I would slap you.” R.O. shouted to 

all within ear shot, “The sub attempted to slap me.” The 

assistant substitute teacher urged R.O. to report the 

incident to the principal. 

(Ex. 3, pp. A70 and A72.) 

7. 

Notably, the Commission concluded Respondent “demonstrated a 

troubling lack of insight into the risk of harm his conduct presents to an educational 

community populated with students experiencing levels of upheaval that have 

negatively impacted their learning.” (Ex. 3, pp. A83-85.) By clear and convincing 

evidence, the Commission found Respondent’s conduct demonstrated he engaged in 

unprofessional, immoral conduct and conduct involving moral turpitude, evidencing 

unfitness to teach. (Id. pp. A85-A86.) Respondent has never acknowledged the truth of 

the findings, expressed remorse, presented persuasive rehabilitation evidence or 

provided any evidence which would assure the Commission he no longer presents a 

5 

 
public safety risk. The findings set forth in OAH Case No. 2021041006 as adopted by 

the Commission, are incorporated in full herein by this reference. (Ex. 3; Official 

Notice.)  

8. 

Respondent filed a Petition for Writ of Mandate with the goal of 

overturning the Commission’s decision. (Superior Court of California, County of San 

Bernardino, March 18, 2022, CIV SB 2206238). On December 16, 2020, the Honorable 

David Cohn, Judge of the Superior Court, issued a Judgment Denying the Petition for 

Writ of Mandate. (Ex. 13.) As part of his final judgment, Judge Cohn adopted his 

tentative ruling of August 31, 2022 which is incorporated in full herein by this 

reference. (Ex. 10.) 

9. 

In relevant part, the final judgment provided: 

               Petitioner Fails to Carry His Burden 

Respondent's final decision and order is located at pages 17 

through 40 of the administrative record. (See AR-000017 -

AR-000040.) 

In its decision, Respondent sets forth the following relevant 

facts: Petitioner received his teaching credential in 2009 and 

his certificate in 2013. (See AR-000018 - AR-000030 [Factual 

Findings] at [¶¶2-3.] Petitioner had received other teaching 

credentials as early as 2004, but they are now expired. (Id. 

¶¶9-11.) In November 2018, Petitioner was sent home after 

he directed disruptive students to kneel on the floor at his 

desk. (Id. ¶¶ 17-23.) In February 2019, Petitioner told a 

student who was antagonizing him, "If you were my son, I 

6 

 
would slap you." (Id.  ¶¶25-29.) In March 2019, Petitioner's 

employment was terminated. (Id. ¶30.) Respondent agreed 

with the ALJ that these incidents supported revocation of 

Petitioner's teaching credential and certificate. (See id. ¶¶ 

24, 31.) 

The decision also discusses the fact that Respondent 

imposed a 120-day suspension against Petitioner in April 

2014 for inappropriately photographing students. (Id. ¶35.)7  

[footnote: Petitioner was criminally charged with 

misdemeanors which were either dismissed or of which he 

was acquitted. See Respondent’s Ex. A. at  ¶¶32-34.

Respondent characterized this as an "aggravating factor." 

]

(Id. ¶¶37, 44.) 

Finally, the decision mentions a prior conviction against 

Petitioner for driving on a suspended driver's license. (Id. 

¶¶38-44.) However, the decision states the incident did not 

provide cause to discipline Petitioner "given the lapse of 

more than one decade since the conviction and the 

underlying misconduct occurred, the diminished evidentiary 

significance of misconduct with the passage of time 

[citation], and the absence of similar, more recent 

misconduct." (Id. ¶43.) 

Respondent determined Petitioner violated the District's 

Positive Behavior Policy by humiliating students when he 

instructed them to kneel at his desk. (See AR-000034 at ¶11 

7 

 
 
[Legal Conclusions].) It further determined Petitioner again 

violated the policy, after being warned and being given 

additional training, when he threatened to slap a fifth 

grader who taunted him. (See id. ¶¶12, 13.) 

Based on these incidents, and because Petitioner lacked 

insight into the risk of harm in the aftermath of both 

incidents, Respondent determined good cause existed for 

revocation of Petitioner's credential and certificate. (See id. 

¶¶14-20.) 

Petitioner’s position appears to be that: (1) he did not 

actually slap the fifth-grade student [see Reply ¶4]; (2) there 

is no evidence Petitioner actually threatened the student 

(see Reply, ¶7). There is also some suggestion in the 

petition that it was unfair that the fifth-grade student did 

not testify. (See Pet. ¶5.)  ["I had presented Discovery to the 

child, his parents and their attorney. The complainant 

answered on behalf the child, family and attorney regarding 

the child's acting behavior and what I said, which was not 

even audible, because I had a flat voice."].) 

In his reply, Petitioner states: 

The student stood in front of me and made faces as a joker. 

He did not hurt me. He was just having fun. I was not mad, 

but tired trying to control the class to prevent any injury. I 

advised him not to that to any teacher [sic] and that if his 

8 

 
father sees him joking in class instead of learning, he will 

punish him. I inadvertently said, if I were his father I would 

smack or slap him. The student went off saying, "the sub 

attempted to slap me." 

(Reply, ¶2.) 

This suggests that Petitioner is arguing he was falsely 

accused of striking the student. But in Respondent's final 

decision, there appears to be no factual dispute regarding 

the issue. Respondent clearly understood that Petitioner did 

not actually slap the student. Instead, Respondent felt the 

statement was threatening. (See AR-000023 - AR000026 at 

¶¶25-31.) 

The student stood in front of me and made faces as a joker. 

He did not hurt me. He was just having fun. I was not mad, 

but tired trying to control the class to prevent any injury. I 

advised him not to that to any teacher [sic] and that if his 

father sees him joking in class instead of learning, he will 

punish him. I inadvertently said, if I were his father I would 

smack or slap him. The student went off saying, "the sub 

attempted to slap me." 

(Reply, ¶2.) 

This suggests that Petitioner is arguing he was falsely 

accused of striking the student. But in Respondent's final 

decision, there appears to be no factual dispute regarding 

9 

 
the issue. Respondent clearly understood that Petitioner did 

not actually slap the student. Instead, Respondent felt the 

statement was threatening. (See AR-000023 - AR000026 at 

¶¶25-31.) 

The statement signed by Petitioner is consistent with 

Respondent's position. In his statement, dated February 7, 

2019, Petitioner stated, in part that he "said, 'Don't that 

again [sic]. If do it again I will slap you [sic]."' (AR-000231; 

see also AR-000413 at lines 13-24 [authentication of 

statement during administrative hearing].) In the 

administrative hearing, Petitioner confirmed the statement. 

(See AR-000416 at lines 19-20 ["That is was I wrote. If you 

do that again, I will slap you."].)[fn 8 noted here states: 

Petitioner testified during the administrative hearing that he 

was ‘shocked’ at the student’s behavior because the student 

looked ‘oriental.’ (AR-000418.)] 

Petitioner's testimony during the administrative hearing is 

inconsistent and appears to shift over time. In his written 

statement, Petitioner stated the student was "trying to 

provoke" him. (See AR-000231.) But Petitioner testified: 

"Actually, he did not provoke me. He did not make me mad. 

But the provoke I used is he caused me to advise him. So 

that's why I used the word provoke." (AR-000419 at lines 

15-17.) 

/// 

10 

 
After going out of his way, both in his written statement 

and his sworn testimony to point out that he inadvertently 

made the slapping comment, Petitioner testified that he 

‘felt sorry’ for doing so: 

Q: I see. You do believe that you did something wrong by 

using the word slap; is that correct? 

A: No, because I did not intend to slap him. I believe it’s not 

wrong. I advised him that, if he was my child, I would have 

slapped him. Slap or smack is what he heard and he started 

shouting that I attempted to slap him. It’s just language. So 

I know that is not wrong. But I felt sorry for using smack or 

slap. 

(AR-000420 at lines 13-20.) 

In his writ petition, Petitioner alleges he testified that he 

would not repeat what he said in the future. (See Pet. ¶5.) 

While that technically appears to be true, Petitioner's refusal 

to acknowledge that his threatening statement to the 

student was wrong supports Respondent's finding that 

Petitioner's "minimization of his agency and responsibility 

as a trained educator with 40 years' experience casts doubt 

on his ability and willingness to comport himself with 

expectations and requirements contrary to his personal 

views." (AR-000036 at ¶15.) 

/// 

11 

 
Petitioner also focuses on Respondent's reliance on his 

prior driving conviction and prior allegations against him of 

annoying or molesting children. (See Pet. ¶¶6, 7.) But 

Respondent rejected the driving conviction as a basis for 

discipline. As for the other criminal allegations, Respondent 

considered the related 120-day suspension, not whether 

Respondent had been convicted of a crime. 

There appears to no real factual dispute in this case 

regarding the facts giving rise to Respondent's final 

decision. Petitioner cites no authority, and none is apparent, 

showing Respondent proceeded in excess of its jurisdiction, 

denied Petitioner a fair hearing, or prejudicially abused its 

discretion. 

The petition for a writ of mandate is therefore denied. …¶ 

Current Application and Disposition 

10. 

The First Amended Statement of Issues contains the same factual 

allegations which formed the basis of the Decision & Order revoking Respondent’s 

previous teaching credentials. (Ex. 1, pp. A25-A31.) The Commission had revoked 

Respondent’s teaching credentials after being notified by the San Bernardino City 

Unified School District he was terminated effective March 4, 2019 based upon the 

above incidents noted in the Writ Decision above. At the meeting of the Committee of 

Credentials on May 28, 2021, the Committee denied Respondent’s Application based 

upon the same material findings which formed the basis of the Commission’s Decision 

& Order. The Committee’s findings are incorporated by reference herein. (Ex. 12, pp 

12 

 
A172-178.) On July 30, 2021, following Respondent’s request for reconsideration the 

Committee affirmed its denial of Respondent’s Application on the ground Respondent 

“failed to provide new and relevant information warranting reconsideration.” (Id., p. 

A171.) 

11. 

In addition to the incidents referenced above, the Committee considered 

relevant aggravating factors, which were considered as well in the Decision & Order 

and included Respondent’s prior suspension in 2014. At its April 10-11, 2014 meeting, 

the Commission issued a 120-day suspension to Respondent after finding probable 

cause Respondent continually photographed two female students, two of whom were 

juveniles, on campus even after they had asked him to stop. Respondent admitted 

taking their pictures because he found the students “attractive” and saw nothing 

wrong with taking the pictures. (Ex. 3, pp. A75-A76; Ex. 12, p. 178.) This incident did 

not establish cause for discipline in the Decision & Order but was considered an 

aggravating factor. (Ex. 3, p. A76.) 

12. 

The First Amended Statement of Issues alleges two legal bases for the 

Commission’s denial of Respondent’s Application: The First Cause for Denial of 

Application (Revocation of Certification Document) based on the revocation of 

Respondent’s Clear Designated Subjects Adult Education Credential and his Clear 

Crosscultural Language and Academic Development Certificate; and the Second Cause 

for Denial of Application (Commission of Acts Involving Moral Turpitude) based upon 

the same two incidents described in the Decision & Order and Writ Decision. 

13.  During the hearing, Respondent offered no new material information that 

would justify the issuance of a different teaching credential and approval of his 

Application. By the time of the Decision & Order, Respondent had obtained an Master 

of Arts in Industrial and Technical Studies, and Master of Science in Higher Education 

13 

 
Administration and completed an Educational Doctoral program in Organizational 

Leadership, K-12 Leadership. Respondent maintains at a minimum he should be 

allowed to purse his career as an administrator. He describes himself as a quiet, gentle 

and religious person who does not drink or consume any recreational drugs. He had 

worked occasionally in the last few years as a substitute teacher at the high school 

level in a private school where a credential was not required. Otherwise, his primary 

source of income is from driving as an Uber driver. 

14. 

Respondent failed to meet his burden of proof on the First and Second 

Causes for Denial of Application by providing any persuasive evidence he is now safe 

and fit to practice as a teacher. As such, the Respondent’s appeal of the Commission’s 

decision is denied. The Commission’s decision to deny the Application is affirmed. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

The burden of proof is on the applicant to establish he is entitled to the 

license. (Breakzone Billiards v. City of Torrance (2000) 81 Cal. App.4th 1205; Southern 

Cal. Jockey Club v. California Horse Racing Bd. (1950) 36 Cal.2d 167.) 

2. 

Pursuant to Code section 44345 the Commission may deny any 

application for the issuance of a credential or for the renewal of the credential made 

by an applicant on the grounds of commission of an act of moral turpitude 

(subdivision (e)) and a revoked certification (subdivision (f)). Denial on these grounds 

“shall be based upon reasons related to the applicant’s fitness to teach or fitness to 

perform other duties which that application is certificated, or competence to perform 

the duties which the credential would authorize the applicant to perform.” 

/// 

14 

 
3. 

Respondent failed to meet his burden of proof on the First Cause for 

Denial of Application (Revocation of Certification Document). Pursuant to Code section 

44345, subdivision (f), the Application may be denied on the basis of the previous 

revocation of his prior credentials, i.e., his Clear Designated Subjects Adult Education 

Teaching Credential: Full Time and his Clear Crosscultural, Language and Academic 

Development Certificate. (Factual Findings 4-14.) 

4. 

Respondent failed to meet his burden of proof on the Second Cause for 

Denial of Application (Commission of Acts Involving Moral Turpitude) pursuant to 

Code section 44345, subdivision (e). “Immoral conduct” in teacher dismissal cases has 

been defined generally as “that which is hostile to the welfare of the general public 

and contrary to good morals. Immorality has not been confined to sexual matters, but 

includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, 

depravity, dissoluteness; or a willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral 

indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the community, and as an 

inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public welfare.” (Board of Education 

of the San Francisco Unified School District v. Weiland (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811.) 

(Factual Findings 4-14.) 

5. 

The Court of Appeals in Woodland Joint Unified School Dist. v. 

Commission of Professional Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444, instructs 

“evident unfitness for service” means “clearly not fit, not adapted to or unsuitable for 

teaching, ordinarily by reason of temperamental defects or inadequacies.” “Evident 

unfitness for service” connotes a fixed character trait, presumably not remediable 

merely on receipt of notice that one's conduct fails to meet the expectations of the 

employing school district. 

/// 

15 

 
6. 

The Decision & Order and Writ Decision establish the unrefuted 

foundational evidence to deny Respondent’s Application including his unfitness to 

teach. (Factual Findings 4-14.) 

7. 

The doctrine of collateral estoppel applies to this action. Collateral 

estoppel, or issue preclusion, “precludes relitigation of issues argued and decided in 

prior proceedings.”  (Mycogen Corp. v. Monsanto Co., (2002) 28 Cal. 4th 888, 896-97, 

citing Lucido v. Superior Court (1990) 51 Cal.3d 335, 341.) “Traditionally, we have 

applied the doctrine only if several threshold requirements are fulfilled. First, the issue 

sought to be precluded from relitigation must be identical to that decided in a former 

proceeding. Second, this issue must have been actually litigated in the former 

proceeding. Third, it must have been necessarily decided in the former proceeding. 

Fourth, the decision in the former proceeding must be final and on the merits. Finally, 

the party against whom preclusion is sought must be the same as, or in privity with the 

party to the former proceeding. (People v. Sims (1982) 32 Cal. 3d 468, 484, 486.Sims, 

supra, 32 Cal.3d at p. 484; People v. Taylor (1974) 12 Cal.3d 686, 691.) 

8. 

Here, the requirements of collateral estoppel have been met. The parties 

and issue litigated are identical; the Decision and Order followed by the Writ Decision 

contained the same findings and the Decision and Order constituted a final 

determination on the merits. (See Sims, supra, 32 Cal.3d at p. 486.) Further, the 

equities of the doctrine were served as Respondent had a full opportunity to present 

evidence and witnesses before OAH and the Superior Court. (Sims, supra, 32 Cal.3d at 

pp. 481–482.) Respondent also had an opportunity to present additional evidence 

during the hearing to establish his rehabilitation and fitness to teach in addition to the 

evidence he supplied in the Decision & Order and Writ Decision but he failed to do so. 

(Factual Finding 13.) (See Sims, supra, 32 Cal. 3d at p. 481, citing, Teitelbaum Furs, Inc. 

16 

 
v. Dominion Ins. Co., Ltd., (1962) 58 Cal.2d 601.) (Factual Finding 10.) Further 

Respondent’s aggravating circumstance of a prior incident involving taking 

photographs of students referenced in both the Decision & Order and Writ Decision 

remains a consideration in the Commission’s decision to reject the  Application. 

(Factual Findings 9 and 11.) 

9. 

Respondent failed to meet his burden of proof and as such, the 

Application is denied. 

ORDER 

The application of Samuel Kwaku Ayei-Fosu Godman for a Credential 

Authorizing Public School Service, Multiple Subject Teaching Credential is denied. 

DATE: 

EILEEN COHN 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings 

17 

01/24/2023 
 
 
 
