BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Petition to Revoke Probation Against: 

CHRISTOPHER JAMES CINO, 

Clear Multiple Subject Teaching Credential,  

Respondent 

Case No. 1-839205149 

OAH No. 2022080686 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Abraham M. Levy, Administrative Law Judge, State of California, Office of 

Administrative Hearings, heard this matter on February 9, 2023, via videoconference. 

Alvaro Mejia, Deputy Attorney General, represented petitioner, Mary Vixie 

Sandy, Ed.D., Executive Director of the Commission on Teacher Credentialing of the 

State of California (Commission). 

James Kosnett, Attorney at Law, Kosnett Law Firm, represented respondent, 

Christopher James Cino, who was present. 

The record was closed, and the matter submitted for decision on February 9, 

2023. 

SUMMARY 

Petitioner asks that respondent’s probation be revoked due to his arrests and 

convictions for driving without a license, driving under the influence of alcohol, and his 

failure to report his arrests to the Commission. Based on the evidence as a whole, the 

petition to revoke respondent’s probation is denied in part and granted in part. 

Respondent presented evidence he is sufficiently rehabilitated that allowing him to 

remain on probation is not against the public interest. But, considering respondent’s 

history of DUIs, and his failure to abide by the terms of his probation, respondent’s 

probation is extended for three years with additional terms and conditions including 

requirements that he attend mental health therapy, undergo a psychiatric evaluation, 

and submit to random drug and alcohol testing.  

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

License History 

1. 

On April 6, 2001, the Commission issued a Clear Multiple Subject 

Teaching Credential to respondent. The Multiple Subject Teaching Credential was in 

effect at all times relevant to the charges and is set to expire on June 1, 2026, unless 

renewed. 

2 

Disciplinary History and Probation 

2. 

Respondent’s disciplinary history arises from five convictions for driving 

under the influence of alcohol (DUI) he incurred between November 6, 1995, and July 

1, 2013.1  

As a result of these convictions, the Commission adopted a Consent 

Determination and issued an Order, effective on September 27, 2013, in the matter 

entitled In the Matter of the Credentials Held by: Christopher Cino, Case Number 1-

85554655. The Commission revoked respondent’s credential, stayed the revocation, 

and suspended respondent’s credential for 45 days starting December 14, 2013. His 

credential was placed on probation for a period of ten years with terms and 

conditions. 

3. 

Among the terms and conditions of respondent’s probation, respondent 

is required to comply with all terms and conditions of probation and obey all laws. 

Those specific terms and conditions are as follows: 

Condition 10 of the Order states: 

If Respondent violates any term or condition of this 

Consent Determination and Order, Respondent will be 

given written notice of the alleged violation and an 

opportunity to respond in writing to the Committee. The 

1 The Commission’s disciplinary action also identifies that respondent was 

convicted of resisting arrest. Petitioner in this proceeding emphasized respondent’s 

DUIs as the relevant criminal history.  

3 

 
Committee will make a determination whether a violation of 

a term or condition of this Consent Determination and 

Order or of probation has occurred. If the Committee 

determines that a violation has occurred, the Committee 

will recommend to the Commission that the stay order be 

set aside and Respondent’s credentials be revoked. The 

Commission will take final action on the recommendation 

of the Committee. The Commission will retain jurisdiction 

over Respondent’s case during the period of probation and 

during the processing of any allegation of a violation of 

probation. The decision of the Commission with respect to 

Respondent’s violation of the Consent Determination and 

Order or probation will be final, with no other 

administrative review, subject only to appropriate judicial 

review. 

4. 

Condition 7(A) of the Order states: 

Any plea of nolo contendere or guilty, jury verdict of guilty, 

finding of guilt by a court in a trial without a jury, or 

conviction following a plea of nolo contendere or no 

contest to any misdemeanor or felony for any violation of 

the law will constitute a violation of probation. Respondent 

will obey all federal, state and local laws and regulations, 

including, but not limited to, the regulations of the 

Commission. Respondent will submit to the Commission a 

full and detailed written account of any and all arrests or 

4 

citations for any violation of law (except infractions) within 

72 hours of the arrest or citation. 

5. 

On June 16, 2022, petitioner filed the petition to revoke respondent’s 

probation. Petitioner alleges that respondent’s probation should be rescinded, and his 

credential revoked because on February 10, 2021, respondent was convicted of driving 

under the influence of alcohol, in violation of Vehicle Code section 23152, subdivision 

(b), and was convicted for driving without a valid license on July 22, 2021. Respondent 

was placed on criminal probation for five years for the DUI offense with various 

conditions and terms. Respondent does not dispute that cause exists to revoke his 

probation.  

Respondent’s Convictions and Respondent’s Letter to the Commission 

6. 

The facts and circumstances of respondent’s arrests and convictions at 

issue in this matter are found in reports from the Costa Mesa Police Department, 

relating to his conviction for driving without a valid license on February 8, 2019, and 

from the Orange County Sheriff Department, relating to respondent driving under the 

influence of alcohol (DUI) conviction. These reports were received into evidence 

pursuant to Lake v. Reed (1997) 16 Cal.4th 448, 461-464.  

7. 

Regarding the conviction for driving without a license, on July 22, 2021, 

in the criminal proceeding entitled People v. Christopher J. Cino (Case No. 

19WM13208), respondent pled guilty and was convicted of driving without a valid 

license in violation of Vehicle Code section 12500, subdivision (a). The offense was 

deemed an infraction at respondent’s sentencing. Respondent was ordered to pay 

fines in the sum of $135. The incident arose from an arrest on February 8, 2019. 

5 

Respondent was arrested after a routine traffic violation stop and a records check 

showed he did not have a valid driver’s license.  

Respondent did not submit a written account of this arrest to the Commission 

within 72 hours of his arrest, as required by the terms of his probation with the 

Commission. 

8. 

Regarding his DUI conviction, on July 22, 2021, in a criminal proceeding 

entitled People v. Christopher J. Cino (Case No. 19WM00296), respondent pled guilty 

and was convicted of DUI, in violation of Vehicle Code section 23152, subdivision (a), 

driving a vehicle with a blood alcohol content (BAC) of 0.08 percent or more in 

violation of Vehicle Code section 23152, subdivision (b), and hit and run with property 

damage in violation of Vehicle Code section 20002, subdivision (a), all misdemeanors. 

Respondent’s BAC was 0.15 percent, as he acknowledged in the plea form he signed. 

Respondent was sentenced to 90 days in jail, plus an additional four days in jail in lieu 

of fines, and was granted informal probation for five years. Respondent was ordered to 

complete an 18-month Multiple Offender Alcohol Program, and to pay restitution. 

9. 

The Orange County Sheriff’s Department report shows the following:  

On April 21, 2018, at about 11:22 p.m., Orange County Sheriff’s Department 

deputies responded to a call regarding a vehicle collision in the City of Stanton. Upon 

arrival, deputies observed two men involved in a physical altercation. A deputy 

identified respondent as one of the subjects and escorted him to a patrol vehicle for 

questioning. The deputy immediately detected the strong odor of alcohol emitting 

from respondent’s breath and noticed that respondent had bloodshot, watery eyes 

and an unsteady gait. During questioning, respondent admitted he collided with the 

other vehicle, and he consumed an alcoholic beverage that morning. Respondent 

6 

refused to answer any other questions or participate in field sobriety testing or a 

Preliminary Alcohol Screening test. Respondent was arrested for driving under the 

influence. Deputies requested a warrant for a blood draw and transported respondent 

to the sheriff’s station for processing. As noted, respondent’s BAC was 0.15 percent.  

10. 

Respondent did not submit a written account of this arrest to the 

Commission within 72 hours of his arrest, as required by the terms of his probation 

with the Commission. The Commission received notification of respondent’s arrest 

through the Department of Justice on April 23, 2018. 

11.   On September 6, 2021, respondent wrote a letter to the Commission 

stating that he violated the terms of his probation when he pled guilty to a 

misdemeanor DUI on July 22, 2021. In this letter, respondent wrote that he has 

struggled with alcohol abuse through the years and that he “make[s] poor decisions at 

times due to alcohol.” He also stated in this letter that he takes his sobriety seriously 

and was now sober.  

Respondent’s Testimony 

12. 

Respondent’s testimony is summarized as follows: 

Respondent has successfully worked over twenty years as a teacher of students 

who are at risk of not graduating. He believes he has made a difference in the lives of 

these students and wishes to continue to do so. Respondent submitted positive 

performance evaluations dating back 20 years.  

Respondent struggles with alcoholism and depression. He described his binge 

drinking as his problem with alcohol, and said he does not drink every day. He stated 

7 

he is now sober and has been sober for five years; he identified his date of sobriety as 

a time shortly after his 2018 DUI arrest.  

13. 

After his DUI arrest, respondent successfully completed an eight-week 

outpatient intensive program through Hoag Hospital. This program involved three 

sessions a week plus random drug and alcohol screens. During this time, he attended 

at least two Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) meetings per week, saw a specialist in 

addiction treatment, and a therapist. Respondent testified due to this program he is 

better able to recognize aspects of his life that are not functioning well, and he can 

reenter the program when “life gets too much for him.” Because of this program, 

respondent said he can deal with his problems and knows when he needs to ask for 

help.  

14. 

Respondent testified he attends AA meetings at different locations. 

Respondent is required to attend these meetings as part of his criminal probation, but 

he plans to continue to attend AA meetings even after his criminal probation ends. He 

does not see a mental health therapist or receive mental health treatment. He goes to 

therapy when he feels he is not in control. To cope with his alcoholism, respondent 

goes to AA and attends church twice a week.  

15. 

Respondent recognized he failed to notify the Commission of his arrests 

as required under the term of his probation. He attributed his failure to his deep 

depression. 

16. 

In answers to questions on cross-examination, respondent said his 

situation after his 2018 DUI arrest is different from the previous five DUIs because he 

now recognizes the relationship between his abuse of alcohol and depression. He also 

said shortly before his 2018 DUI arrest he became seriously depressed and could not 

8 

get out of bed. Respondent added that his father’s health issues at the time 

contributed to his abuse of alcohol.  

17. 

Respondent stated that he is willing to comply with any terms of 

probation the Commission may impose including random biological fluid testing.  

Character Testimony and References 

18. 

Respondent called as character witnesses Bradley Morrison, Marlene 

Simmons, and Darren Lax. Mr. Morrison, Ms. Simmons, and Mr. Lax also submitted 

letters on respondent’s behalf. In addition, respondent submitted letters from his 

former students, Cynthia Gutierrez and Samuel Gordon. 

19.  Mr. Morrison testified he has known respondent for over thirty years 

through church, and for the last five years he has worked with respondent through 

Celebrate Recovery, a recovery group. Mr. Morrison described respondent as resilient 

and able to bounce back from the problems he has had. He is generally familiar with 

respondent’s criminal history and his DUIs. He stressed respondent’s positive role in 

the lives of his students over the years. He believes it would be a disservice to students 

if respondent could not continue as an educator.  

20.  Ms. Simmons is a teacher for the Orange County Department of 

Education and has known respondent for twenty years, and has been working with him 

at the same job site for eight years. She described him as an empathetic, professional, 

and caring teacher committed to helping at risk students. She said she has seen no 

problems with his professionalism as a teacher. As president of the teacher’s union Ms. 

Simmons said she would know if any concerns about respondent’s professionalism 

were raised.  

9 

Ms. Simmons recognizes respondent is an alcoholic and has struggled with 

alcohol use. She supports him keeping his credential.  

21.  Mr. Lax is respondent’s colleague and has known him as a fellow teacher 

for ten years. He has served as lead teacher with respondent for three years. Mr. Lax 

also described respondent as a very professional and very caring teacher with a deep 

love for reaching out to at risk youth. Mr. Lax is aware that respondent has struggled 

with alcohol, but he believes he has diligently worked on his sobriety. He did not know 

that respondent had five DUI convictions.  

22.  Mr. Gordon in his letter stated that he has known respondent for 20 

years. Respondent was his teacher and helped him learn how to be successful in 

school. He described respondent as patient and professional. With respondent’s help, 

Mr. Gordon was able to return to the high school and graduate. He has maintained 

contact with respondent over the years and now considers him a friend. Mr. Gordon is 

not familiar with respondent’s disciplinary history but believes it has to do with his 

ability to maintain his sobriety.  

23.  Ms. Gutierrez is a recent graduate of respondent’s class and is now 

attending college. She wrote that respondent has been a blessing to her. He 

encouraged her to graduate high school and attend college and was always there for 

her when she needed help. He nominated her for a scholarship to help her provide for 

her family. Ms. Gutierrez expressed the hope that respondent can continue as a 

teacher to continue his work to help youth. She did not indicate in her letter she was 

aware of respondent’s disciplinary history.  

10 

Parties’ Arguments 

24. 

Petitioner argued in closing that due to respondent’s DUIs, his credential 

should be revoked in the public interest. Respondent violated his probation because 

he did not abstain from alcohol use and failed to obey all laws. Given his disciplinary 

history, allowing him to remain on probation would be a “toothless endeavor.” In the 

alternative, however, petitioner argued that if respondent is allowed to remain on 

probation a similar length of probation should be imposed with terms and conditions 

that include random testing, and that he be required to participate in therapy.  

25. 

Respondent in closing argued that petitioner did not meet her burden to 

show that revocation is required to protect the public and respondent has earned the 

right to continue as a teacher due to his exemplary history as a teacher.  

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

Standard of Proof 

1. 

Petitioner has the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence 

that the charges in the petition to revoke probation are true. (Sandarg v. Dental Bd. of 

California (2010) 184 Cal.App.4th 1434, 1441.) A preponderance of the evidence means 

that the evidence on one side outweighs the evidence on the other side, not 

necessarily in number of witnesses or quantity, but in its effect on those to whom it is 

addressed. In other words, it refers to evidence that has more convincing force than 

that opposed to it. (People ex rel. Brown v. Tri-Union Seafoods, LLC (2009) 171 

Cal.App.4th 1549, 1567.) 

11 

Cause Exists to Revoke Probation 

2. 

Cause exists to find that respondent violated the terms of his probation 

due to his July 22, 2021, DUI conviction in violation of Vehicle Code section 12352, 

subdivision (b), and driving without a license in violation of Vehicle Code section 

Vehicle Code section 12500, subdivision (a). Due to these convictions, respondent 

violated Condition # 7(A), which requires respondent to obey all laws. As a result, 

under Condition # 10, petitioner may seek to revoke respondent’s probation. 

3. 

Cause also exists to find that respondent violated the terms of his 

probation because he failed to inform the Commission within 72 hours as required 

under Condition # 7(A) of his arrests for driving without a license and DUI. As a result, 

under Condition # 10, petition may seek to revoke respondent’s probation.  

Evaluation 

4. 

With causes to revoke respondent’s teaching credential found, the issue 

is whether rescission of respondent’s probation and revocation of his teaching 

certificate are required due to his violations of the probation. The Commission 

imposed probation to protect students due to respondent’s history of alcohol abuse 

resulting in DUIs and the question this raises regarding his fitness to serve as a 

teacher. (See Woodland Joint Unified School Dist. v. Commission on Professional 

Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th1429, at p. 1444 (“’Evident unfitness to serve’. . . 

means “‘clearly not fit, not adapted to or unsuitable . . . ordinarily by reasons of 

temperamental defects or inadequacies.’”(Citation omitted.))) 

5. 

Considering respondent’s credible testimony and the testimony of 

persons who know him, respondent presented sufficient evidence that he can remain 

on probation, with his probation extended for a period of time, with additional terms 

12 

and conditions to ensure he is fit to serve as a teacher. These terms and conditions 

include requirements that he be evaluated by a psychiatrist, receive psychotherapy, 

attend group therapy, and submit to random testing. Respondent testified he is willing 

to comply with such conditions and terms. With these terms and conditions, 

revocation of his certificate is not necessary to ensure public protection and would 

thus amount to impermissible punishment. (Fahmy v. Medical Board of California 

(1995) 38 Cal.App.4th 810, 817.) A ten-year probation period, as petitioner requested 

in the alternative, would also be punitive considering the evidence of record as a 

whole.  

6. 

This conclusion is reached for these reasons: Respondent has had a long-

standing history of alcohol abuse which has resulted in six DUIs over a 20-year period. 

Respondent credibly testified he has been sober for five years, since 2018, and is 

committed to his sobriety. Through the outpatient program he completed in 2019 he 

gained insight into the scope and nature of his abuse of alcohol. He now recognizes 

the connection between the episodes of depression he has suffered and his abuse of 

alcohol. He testified he has resources to help him maintain his sobriety, which include 

the outpatient program at Hoag, the church he attends, and the AA program.  

However, despite recognizing the connection between the episodes of 

depression and alcohol abuse, respondent has not seen a mental health professional. 

Thus, as a condition of probation respondent will be required to undergo 

psychotherapy.  

7. 

In deciding the terms and conditions of probation to impose, it is noted 

that the Commission has not adopted uniform terms and conditions of probation. The 

Commission has, however, requested public comment on proposed disciplinary 

guidelines that would include uniform terms and conditions similar to those of other 

13 

licensing agencies. (See Proposed Disciplinary Guidelines (Feb. 21, 2019) 

https://www.ctc.ca.gov/docs/default-source/commission/agendas/2019-02/2019-02-

5b.pdf?sfvrsn=2 [as of February 17, 2023].) Under Government Code section 11515, 

official notice of that public comment request is made of these proposed guidelines. 

The uniform terms and conditions of probation in the proposed disciplinary guidelines 

have been referenced for the limited purpose of providing guidance as to the format 

of the probation terms and conditions in this case. 

ORDER 

The Petition to Revoke Probation is granted in part and denied in part.  

The Multiple Subject Teaching Credential issued to respondent is revoked. 

However, the revocation is stayed, and respondent’s probation is extended for a term 

of three years beginning from the end of respondent’s current probation, September 

23, 2023, with the following terms and conditions to take effect immediately upon the 

effective date of this Order:  

1. Severability Clause 

Each condition of probation contained herein is a separate and distinct 

condition. If any condition of probation, or part thereof, or any application thereof, is 

declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unenforceable in whole or in part, 

or to any extent, the remaining conditions of probation, and each of them, and all 

other applications thereof, shall not be affected. Each condition of probation herein 

shall be separately valid and enforceable to the fullest extent permitted by law. 

2. New Credentials Subject to Order 

14 

Any new credential issued by the Commission to respondent during the period 

of probation shall be subject to this order, and respondent shall be subject to the 

same terms and conditions of probation with respect to any such new credentials, as 

set forth herein. 

3. Compliance with Probation 

Respondents shall fully comply with each and every term and condition of 

probation. During the entire period of probation, respondent shall submit quarterly 

declarations under penalty of perjury, in a format to be approved by the Commission, 

stating whether there has been full compliance with the terms and conditions of 

probation. Respondent shall submit a full and detailed description of any violation of 

any terms or condition of probation on the quarterly declarations. 

Respondent shall submit the quarterly declarations not later than 10 days after 

the end of each quarter which, for purposes of this term and condition, are: March 

31st, June 30th, September 30th, and December 31st. 

4. Cooperation with Commission 

During the entire period of probation, respondent shall fully cooperate with the 

Commission in its monitoring and investigation of respondent’s compliance with 

probation. 

5. Interview with Commission 

During the entire period of probation, respondent shall be available for 

interview either in person or by telephone, with or without prior notice, with the 

Commission. 

6. Notification 

15 

Within five days of the effective date of this order, respondent shall provide a 

true and correct copy of this decision, together with a true and correct copy of the 

petition to revoke probation, which form the basis for the decision, to respondent’s 

employer as defined by the California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80300, 

subdivision (j), if any, and to respondent’s immediate supervisor at that employer. 

Within five days of complying with this notification requirement, respondent shall 

submit proof of compliance to the Commission. 

If respondent changes employment at any time during probation, respondent 

shall again comply with this notification requirement within seven days of accepting 

new employment and shall again submit proof of compliance to the Commission, as 

required herein, within five days of complying with this notification requirement. 

Respondent shall comply with this notification requirement, and proof of compliance, 

as described herein, each and every time respondent changes employment during the 

probationary period. 

Within seven days of this order, respondent shall also notify the Commission in 

writing of the name and address of the current employer with whom respondent has 

contracted or is otherwise engaged to perform education services. Respondent shall 

provide this same information to the Commission within seven days of any change in 

employment and, in addition, shall also provide a full and complete explanation of the 

facts and circumstances surrounding the cessation of employment with the former 

employer. 

7. Maintain Active, Current Credentials 

During the entire period of probation, respondent shall maintain active, current 

credentials with the Commission, including during any period of suspension. 

16 

8. Maintain Current Contact Information 

Within seven days of the effective date of this order, respondent shall notify the 

Commission of a current mailing address, current email address, and current telephone 

number where voicemail or test messages may be left. Within 72 hours of any change 

of mailing address, email address, or telephone number, respondent shall notify the 

Commission of the new mailing address, email address, and telephone number. 

9. Obey All Laws 

Respondent shall obey all federal, state and local laws, including all laws 

governing the education profession in California, and shall remain in full compliance 

with all court orders, criminal probation or parole, and shall make all court-ordered 

payments. 

Except for minor traffic infractions, within 72 hours of any incident resulting in 

respondent’s arrest, the filing of any criminal charges, or citation issued, respondent 

shall submit a full and detailed description of the incident to the Commission. For 

purposes of this condition, a “minor traffic infraction” includes only traffic violations 

which are punishable by a maximum fine of $250, and do not subject the offender to 

incarceration or probation. (See Veh. Code, § 42001; Pen. Code, §§ 17, subd. (d), 19.6 

and 19.8.) 

Within 72 hours of receiving notice of any violation of any court order, criminal 

probation or parole, or failure to make any court-ordered payment, respondent shall 

submit a full and detailed description of the incident to the Commission. 

To permit monitoring of respondent’s compliance with this condition, 

respondent shall ensure that fingerprints are on file with the Commission. 

Respondents residing outside of California can also comply with this fingerprint 

17 

requirement by submitting, within 30 days of the effective date of this order, two 

fingerprint cards (FD-258) and payment of the additional applicable fingerprint fee. 

10. Probation Monitoring Costs 

Respondent shall pay the costs associated with probation monitoring, as 

designated by the Commission, for each year of probation. Probation monitoring costs 

shall be made payable to the California Commission on Teacher Credentialing. Within 

30 days of the effective date of this order, respondent shall pay the Commission the 

prorated probation monitoring costs for the number of months remaining in the 

calendar year. Beginning with the second year of probation, the full year of probation 

monitoring costs shall be paid to the Commission on or before January 31st of each 

calendar year. The total probation monitoring costs for each calendar year may be 

adjusted by the Commission on an annual basis. 

11. Violation of Probation 

Failure to fully comply with any term or condition of probation, or any part 

thereof, shall constitute a violation of probation. If respondent violates any term or 

condition of probation, or any part thereof, in any respect, the matter will be referred 

to the Office of the Attorney General for preparation of a Petition to Revoke Probation. 

After giving respondent notice and an opportunity to be heard, the Commission may 

revoke probation and impose the order that was stayed, i.e., revocation of 

respondent’s credentials. If a Petition to Revoke Probation is filed against respondent 

during probation, or the Attorney General’s Office has been asked to prepare a 

Petition to Revoke Probation against respondent, the Commission shall have 

continuing jurisdiction until the matter is final, and the period of probation shall be 

automatically extended until the matter is final. 

18 

Respondent’s credentials may also be subject to immediate suspension for any 

specified violation of probation as provided in this order. If respondent does not 

comply with any part of a probation condition that includes a consequence of 

suspension for failure to comply, the Commission will notify respondent in writing that 

respondent’s credentials are immediately suspended. Thereafter, the suspension of 

respondent’s credentials shall not be lifted until the effective date of a final decision of 

the Commission on a Petition to Revoke Probation to be filed against respondent. 

If a Petition to Revoke Probation is not filed against respondent within 30 days 

of issuance of the written notification from the Commission to respondent that 

respondent’s credentials are immediately suspended, or respondent is not provided 

with an administrative hearing within 30 days of a written request for a hearing, unless 

respondent stipulates to a later hearing, the suspension shall be dissolved. The 

deadlines established herein shall be computed pursuant to the provisions of sections 

12 through 12c of the Code of Civil Procedure. Where an original suspension has 

dissolved, nothing shall prohibit issuance of another suspension for any additional or 

subsequent violation by respondent as a condition of probation. 

12. Abstention from the Possession and Use of Mood-Altering Substances 

For purposes of this term and condition of probation, banned substances 

include alcohol, marijuana and any of its derivatives, all controlled substances and 

dangerous drugs, and all other mood-altering drugs or substances. 

During the period of probation, respondent shall completely abstain from the 

possession or use of all banned substances. 

CAUTION: Respondent shall not ingest or use any products that contain any 

trace amount of any banned substance such as cold/flu medications, cough syrups, 

19 

diet pills and products, mouthwash, skin care or hygiene products perfumes, poppy 

seeds, or certain foods and desserts, etc. 

This probationary term does not apply to controlled substances or dangerous 

drugs lawfully prescribed to respondent by a licensed health care professional legally 

authorized to do so as part of documented medical treatment for a bona fide illness or 

condition. Respondent shall provide information regarding any current or former 

treating physician, counselor, or any other treating healthcare professionals as 

requested by the Commission. 

Within five days of receiving any prescription for any controlled substance or 

dangerous drug, Respondent shall provide written notification of the following 

information to the Commission: (1) the licensed health care professional who issued 

the prescription including address and telephone number; (2) the name of the 

prescribed controlled substance or dangerous drug, and the strength and quantity of 

the prescribed controlled substance or dangerous drug; and (3) the name, address, 

and telephone number of the pharmacy that filled the prescription. 

Respondent shall also execute a release authorizing the release to the 

Commission of physical health medical records, mental health medical records, 

prescribing records and pharmacy records. The release shall remain valid and in full 

force and effect for the entirety of respondent's probationary period. If respondent, for 

any reason, rescinds the release during his or her period of probation, the rescission 

shall constitute a violation of probation and respondent's credentials are immediately 

suspended upon written notice from the Commission. 

13. Banned Substances Testing 

20 

Respondent shall participate in random testing for the detection of banned 

substances, which include alcohol, marijuana and any of its derivates, all controlled 

substances and dangerous drugs, and all other mood-altering drugs or substances, at 

a laboratory previously approved by the Commission. Such testing shall include, but 

not be limited to, biological fluid testing (i.e., urine, blood, or saliva testing), hair, 

fingernail, or breath testing, and/or participation in a daily drug screening program 

previously approved by the Commission. Respondent shall bear the expense of such 

testing.  

Respondent shall not perform any service authorized by respondent's 

credentials until respondent has signed up for and is presently participating in banned 

substances testing, and has submitted documentation to the Commission evidencing 

that participation, as required herein. 

Respondent shall make daily contact, each and every day of the probationary 

period, including weekends, holidays, and vacations both inside and outside of 

California, with a laboratory previously approved by the Commission to determine if 

respondent is required to submit a specimen or specimens for testing on that day. 

During probation, respondent shall also promptly submit to testing for the 

detection of banned substances at the direction of respondent's employer, immediate 

supervisor, and/or law enforcement.  

Respondent shall fully cooperate with the Commission and shall, when directed, 

personally appear and provide a specimen or specimens for testing to detect the use 

of any banned substances. All specimen collections shall be observed. 

Any alternative testing site proposed by respondent due to an anticipated 

vacation or travel outside of California must first be approved by the Commission at 

21 

least 30 days prior to respondent's anticipated vacation or travel. As part of the 

approval process, respondent shall provide any and all information about the 

proposed alternative testing site requested by the Commission. Unless previously 

approved by the Commission, respondent shall not utilize an alternative testing site 

and any test results from an alternative testing site which has not been previously 

approved by the Commission shall not be accepted as valid test results. 

If respondent fails to participate in random testing for the detection of banned 

substances, fails to make daily contact with a laboratory previously approved by the 

Commission, fails to personally appear when directed to do so, fails to provide a 

specimen or specimens for the detection of banned substances, tests positive for any 

banned substance, or otherwise violates this condition of probation in any respect, 

respondent's credentials are immediately suspended upon written notice from the 

Commission. 

Any test result registering over the established laboratory cut off level for any 

banned substance, even that which could result from respondent's incidental contact 

with any banned substance, shall be considered a positive test result and, therefore, a 

violation of probation. If respondent has a positive test result for any banned 

substance, respondent's credentials are immediately suspended upon written notice 

from the Commission. 

If respondent has a negative diluted test result, respondent shall submit to 

blood, saliva, hair, fingernail, or breath testing at respondent's own expense as 

directed by the Commission. 

If the Commission determines, for any reason, that a previously reported 

positive test is not evidence of prohibited use, the Commission shall so inform 

22 

respondent and respondent's employer that the positive test will not be treated as a 

violation of probation and that respondent's credentials are no longer suspended. In 

making this determination, the Commission may, but is not required to, consult with 

the specimen collector, laboratory testing facility, respondent, any treating physician 

or other healthcare provider, or any support group facilitator, to determine whether 

the positive test is evidence of respondent's prohibited use of a banned substance. 

14. Psychiatric Evaluation 

Within 30 days of the effective date of this order, and on whatever periodic 

basis thereafter as may be required by the Commission, respondent, at his expense, 

shall undergo and complete a psychiatric evaluation, including psychological testing if 

deemed necessary, by a board-certified psychiatrist approved by the Commission. The 

designated board-certified psychiatrist approved by the Commission may be located 

anywhere in the State of California and respondent shall pay all travel costs and 

expenses required to attend, undergo and complete the psychiatric evaluation. 

Psychiatric evaluations conducted prior to the effective date of this order shall not be 

accepted as compliance with this requirement. 

The psychiatrist shall consider any information provided by the Commission, 

and any other information the psychiatrist deems relevant, and shall furnish a written 

evaluation report to the Commission. Respondent shall cooperate in providing the 

psychiatrist any information and documents that the psychiatrist deems pertinent and 

requests. 

The written evaluation report prepared by the evaluating psychiatrist shall 

clearly state if Respondent is presently mentally fit to perform the services authorized 

23 

by respondent's credentials with complete safety to schoolchildren, the education 

profession and the public. 

Following completion of the evaluation, respondent shall fully comply with all 

restrictions and conditions recommended by the evaluating psychiatrist within seven 

days after being notified to do so by the Commission. 

If respondent refuses or fails to attend, pay for, or undergo the required 

psychiatric evaluation, including submitting to psychological testing if deemed 

necessary, refuses or fails to cooperate with an examiner or, following completion of 

the evaluation, is found to be presently mentally unfit to perform the services 

authorized by respondent's credentials with complete safety to schoolchildren, the 

education profession, and the public, respondent's credentials are immediately 

suspended upon written notice from the Commission.  

If prior to the completion of probation respondent is found to be mentally unfit 

to perform the services authorized by respondent's credentials with complete safety to 

schoolchildren, the education profession and the public, the Commission shall retain 

continuing jurisdiction over respondent's credentials and the period of probation shall 

be extended until the Commission determines that Respondent is mentally fit to 

perform them. 

15. Psychotherapy 

Within 60 days of the effective date of this order, respondent shall submit to the 

Commission for prior approval the name and qualifications of a California-licensed 

board-certified psychiatrist or a licensed psychologist who has a doctoral degree in 

psychology and at least five years of postgraduate experience in the diagnosis and 

treatment of emotional and mental disorders who will provide psychotherapy to 

24 

respondent. Upon approval, respondent shall undergo and continue psychotherapy 

treatment, including any modifications to the frequency of psychotherapy, until the 

psychotherapist has determined that no further psychotherapy is necessary, and 

respondent has been so notified in writing by the Commission. Respondent shall 

cooperate in providing the psychotherapist any information and documents that the 

psychotherapist deems pertinent and requests. Respondent shall pay all cost of 

psychotherapy treatment.  

The psychotherapist shall consider any information provided by the 

Commission and any other information the psychotherapist deems relevant and shall 

furnish a written evaluation report to the Commission. Respondent shall also have the 

treating psychotherapist submit quarterly status reports to the Commission.  

Respondent shall fully comply with all restrictions and conditions recommended 

by the psychotherapist within seven days of being notified to do so by the 

Commission. If, prior to the completion of probation, the psychotherapist finds 

respondent to be mentally unfit to perform the services authorized by respondent's 

credentials with complete safety to schoolchildren, the education profession and the 

public, the psychotherapist shall immediately inform the Commission of this finding in 

writing. Respondent shall thereafter receive written notification from the Commission 

that his credentials are immediately suspended, the Commission shall retain 

continuing jurisdiction over respondent's credentials, and the period of probation shall 

be extended until the Commission determines that respondent is mentally fit to 

perform such services. 

Respondent shall execute a release authorizing the release of all information 

regarding psychotherapy treatments, including any psychiatric evaluation and 

psychological testing, to the Commission. The release shall remain valid and in full 

25 

force and effect for the entirety of respondent's probationary period. If respondent, for 

any reason, rescinds the release during the period of probation, the rescission shall 

constitute a violation of probation and respondent's credentials are immediately 

suspended upon written notice from the Commission. 

16. Attendance and Participation in Group Support Meetings 

Within 10 days of the effective date of this order, respondent shall begin 

attendance at an addictive behavior support group (e.g., Alcoholics Anonymous, 

Narcotics Anonymous, or other similar support group), which has been previously 

approved by the Commission. Respondent shall attend at least one meeting of the 

approved support group per week for (period of time, e.g., the entire period of 

probation, or the first 12 months of probation, etc.). Verified documentation 

confirming respondent's attendance shall be submitted by respondent with each of 

the Quarterly Declarations to the Commission. 

17. Completion of Probation 

Respondent shall submit full payment of all remaining probation monitoring 

costs not later than 60 days prior to the completion of probation. Upon completion of 

probation, respondent’s credentials shall be fully restored, and this decision will 

continue to remain a matter of public record thereafter. 

DATE: February 21, 2023

ABRAHAM M. LEVY 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings

26 

Abraham M. Levy (Feb 21, 2023 09:25 PST) 
 
