BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Accusation Against: 

MAURICE WARREN MYERS, 

Clear Single Subject Teaching Credential 

Administrative Services Credential, Certificate of Eligibility 

Clear Crosscultural, Language and Academic Development 

Certificate, 

Respondent. 

Agency Case No. 2-72314216 

OAH Case No. 2022030185 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Jennifer M. Russell, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings, 

State of California, heard this matter by videoconference on January 9, 10, and 11, 

2023. The record closed and the matter was submitted for decision on January 11, 

2023. 

Deputy Attorney General Gillian E. Friedman represented complainant Mary Vixie 

Sandy, Ed. D., Executive Director, Commission on Teacher Credentialing (CTC), State of 

California. Ellen Doty, Attorney at Law, Rothschild Wishek & Sands LLP, represented 

respondent Maurice Warren Myers, who was present on all three hearing days. 

Complainant seeks revocation of respondent’s credentials, certificates, and 

authorizations based on allegations of unprofessional conduct, immoral conduct, 

evident unfitness for service, acts involving moral turpitude, and persistent defiance. 

Competent testimony and documents received in evidence failed to prove by clear and 

convincing evidence respondent engaged in conduct indicating his unfitness to teach. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Procedural History and Jurisdictional Matters 

1. 

The CTC is responsible for credentialing teachers and taking adverse 

action against applicants and credentialed holders. (Ed. Code, § 44000, et seq.; Calif. 

Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80001, et seq.) 

2. 

On November 13, 1998, the CTC issued to respondent an Emergency 30-

Day Substitute Teaching Permit, which was renewed in 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, and 

2005. 

3. 

On June 19, 2006, the CTC issued to respondent a Preliminary Single 

Subject Teaching Credential. Upon respondent’s completion of certain requirements, 

on July 22, 2008, the CTC issued to him a Clear Single Subject Teaching Credential, 

which was in full force and effect at all times relevant to the allegations in the 

Accusation. The Clear Single Subject Teaching Credential expires on August 1, 2023. 

2 

4. 

On April 17, 2008, the CTC issued to respondent a Clear Crosscultural, 

Language and Academic Development (CLAD) Certificate, which was in full force and 

effect at all times relevant to the allegations in the Accusation. 

5. 

On September 23, 2010, the CTC issued to respondent an Administrative 

Services Credential, Certificate of Eligibility, which was in full force and effect at all 

times relevant to the allegations in the Accusation. 

6. 

Effective August 15, 2019, respondent resigned from the Chino Valley 

Unified School District (District) in accordance with the terms of a Resignation 

Agreement and General Release he entered into with the District. 

7. 

By electronic mail dated September 13, 2019, the District’s Assistant 

Superintendent of Human Resources, Richard Rideout, provided the CTC with a 

Notification of Credential Holder’s Change in Employment Status Due to Allegations of 

Misconduct, to which several documents were attached, including a Certification of 

Minutes recording the District’s Approval of Settlement Agreement and the 

Resignation Agreement and General Release, which in turn attached respondent’s 

Letter of Resignation. (Exh. 4 [A79-A91].) 

8. 

By letters dated September 2, 2020, Inez Cordero, Associate 

Governmental Program Analyst, Division of Professional Practices at the CTC, 

requested Assistant Superintendent Rideout to provide additional information not 

already sent to the CTC and informed respondent the CTC was in receipt of 

information requiring an investigation of his fitness to hold a credential. The 

September 2, 2020 letter encouraged respondent to provide a written response within 

30 days of the date of the letter. (Exh. 3 [A74].) 

/// 

3 

9. 

Ms. Cordero prepared a Confidential Investigative Report, dated October 

26, 2020. (Exh. 3 [A70-A73].) 

10. 

Consistent with Education Code section 44242.7, subdivision (a), within 

one year of the CTC’s receipt of the Notification of Credential Holder’s Change in 

Employment Status Due to Allegations of Misconduct, the Committee of Credentials 

(Committee) commenced a timely review of the allegations respondent engaged in 

misconduct. The Committee is a subdivision of the CTC authorized to investigate such 

allegations. 

11. 

By letter dated December 3, 2020, the CTC provided respondent with a 

Notice of Formal Review informing him the Committee reviewed his case and the 

Committee was scheduled to consider the information in the Confidential Investigative 

Report at its January 20-22, 2021 meeting. (Exh. 3 [A68].) 

12.  On January 21, 2021, the Committee conducted a formal review to 

determine whether information contained in the Confidential Investigative Report 

constitutes probable cause for adverse action. Respondent, represented by legal 

counsel, appeared before the Committee. (Exh. 3 [A63-A64].) 

13. 

Acting pursuant to Education Code section 44242.5, subdivision (e)(1), 

the Committee recommended revocation of respondent’s credentials and all other 

certification documents. On February 5, 2021, the CTC provided respondent with a 

Notice of Committee Recommendation, which informs him about the Committee’s 

recommendation and of his options to request reconsideration of the 

recommendation or an administrative hearing to challenge the recommendation. The 

Notice of Committee Recommendation encloses a report titled Findings of the 

Committee of Credentials (Exh. 3 [A51-A62]), which, contrary to respondent’s counsel’s 

4 

contention at hearing, is not a confidential document protected from public disclosure. 

Education Code section 44242.5, subdivision (c)(3)(B), anticipates release of the 

Findings of the Committee of Credentials in administrative proceedings such as this 

when respondent requests an administrative hearing. 

14. 

Respondent requested an administrative hearing. 

15.  On August 31, 2021, Ms. Friedman signed and caused the filing of the 

Accusation in an official capacity on behalf of Rob Bonta, the Attorney General of 

California. Pursuant to Government Code section 11507, paragraph 13 of the 

Accusation was amended by interlineation during the hearing to read as follows: “At all 

times relevant herein, Respondent was employed by the Chino Valley Unified School 

District (District) as a secondary teacher at Don Lugo High School and thereafter at 

Chino High School in Chino Valley, California.” 

16.  On September 15, 2021, respondent filed a Notice of Defense. 

17. 

All jurisdictional requirements are satisfied. 

The District’s Policy Bulletins and Certificated Employee Training 

18. 

Ayala High School (Ayala), Don Antonio Lugo High School (Don Lugo) 

and Chino High School are among the several schools comprising the District. The size 

of the student population at the District in general and at each of these three schools 

in particular was not established by the evidence. 

19. 

Concurrent with their hire, certificated employees of the District are 

informed about and receive training regarding District policies governing their 

conduct as professional educators. District training includes surveys of the laws 

governing mandated reporters, sexual misconduct, and sexual harassment. District 

5 

training additionally includes orientation to several policies adopted by the District’s 

governing board. 

20. 

For example, at the time of hire certificated employees, including 

respondent, are made aware of District Board Policy 4119.21: Rules of Conduct for 

Professional Educators, which provides the following: 

The Board of Education expects District employees to 

maintain the highest ethical standards, exhibit professional 

behavior, follow District policies and regulations, and abide 

by state and federal laws. Employee conduct should 

enhance the integrity of the District and advance the goals 

of the District’s educational programs. Each employee 

should make a commitment to acquire the knowledge and 

skills necessary to fulfill his/her contribution to the learning 

and achievement of district students. 

The Board encourage District employees to accept as 

guiding principles the professional standards and codes of 

ethics adopted by the educational or professional 

associations to which they may belong. 

Staff Conduct with Students 

The Board expects all employees to exercise good 

judgment and maintain professional standards and 

boundaries when interacting with students both on and off 

school property. Inappropriate employee conduct shall 

include, but not limited to, engaging in harassing or 

6 

discriminatory behavior; engaging in inappropriate 

socialization or fraternization with a student; soliciting, 

encouraging, or establishing an inappropriate written, 

verbal, or physical relationship with a student; furnishing 

tobacco, alcohol, or other illegal or unauthorized 

substances to a student; or engaging in child abuse. 

(Exh. 9 at p. 6 [A147].) 

21. 

At the time of hire, certificated employees, including respondent, are 

made aware of District Board Policy 4119.26: Employee/Student Interaction, which 

provides the following: 

It is the policy of the Chino Valley Unified School District 

that all District employees conduct themselves at all times 

in a manner that reflects the standards consistent with the 

law and the policies of the District. It is the purpose of this 

policy to make sure all District employees understand and 

demonstrate proper judgment observing the prohibitions in 

behavior, which must govern their conduct; and recognize 

the responsibility to respond appropriately to unacceptable 

behavior of students and or co-workers. Further, this policy 

will specify boundaries related to potentially sexual 

situations and conduct, which is contrary to accepted 

behavior and in conflict with the duties and responsibilities 

of District employees. In addition, this policy will alert all 

District employees about sensitive problematic matters 

involved in employee/student relationships, provide 

7 

guidance for employees in conducting themselves in a 

manner that reflects high standards of professionalism; and 

to give notice that potential improper action may have 

significant consequences. It is the intent and purpose of this 

policy to establish guidelines, which should be followed by 

all District employees when interacting with a student. 

(Exh. 9 at p. 7 [A148].) 

22. 

Assistant Superintendent Rideout’s testimony established (a) the District 

provided no training to its employees regarding their conduct with former high school 

students who are now adults (hereinafter “former adult students of the District) and (b) 

the District provided no training to its employees relating to the use of legal marijuana 

with former adult students. Assistant Superintendent Rideout’s testimony further 

established, prior to April 2019, the District did not warn respondent against smoking 

legal marijuana in the presence of former adult students of the District. 

Respondent’s Background as an Educator 

23. 

Respondent has 23 years’ experience as an educator. Prior to becoming 

an educator respondent engaged in misconduct resulting in two separate criminal 

convictions. 

(a). 

In People v. Maurice W. Myers (Super. Ct., San Bernardino Cty. and 

Municipal Ct. Dist., 1993, No. MWV07101), respondent was convicted on his guilty plea 

of violating Penal Code section 484, subdivision (f)(2) (forging credit card information), 

a misdemeanor. The court withheld pronouncement of judgment and granted three 

years conditional revocable release with terms and conditions, including respondent 

serving 60 days (one day credit) in San Bernardino County Jail. 

8 

(b). 

In People v. Maurice Warren Meyers (Super. Ct., Los Angeles Cty. 

Municipal Ct. Citrus Judicial Dist., 1995, No. KA025583), respondent was convicted on 

his nolo contendere plea of violating Penal Code sections 470, subdivision (a) 

(unlawfully alter, falsify, forge, duplicate, reproduce and counterfeit a governmental 

agency driver’s license and identification card with the intent the documents would be 

used to facilitate the commission of a forgery) and 459 (second degree commercial 

burglary), both felonies. The court found a factual basis for respondent’s plea, 

suspended imposition of sentence, and placed respondent on three years formal 

probation with terms and conditions, including serving one day in Los Angeles County 

Jail. 

24. 

The CTC was aware of respondent’s criminal record when it issued to 

respondent the permits, credentials, and certifications discussed in Factual Findings 2 

through 5. 

25. 

According to respondent’s testimony, his upbringing in Compton and 

Pomona informed his pursuit of a career in education. Teaching District students at 

Ayala, Don Lugo, and Chino High School in addition to students attending schools in 

other districts, respondent adheres to a philosophy of “if you want to make the world 

better, you have to make a better people.” Thus, respondent takes “an individualized 

learning plan approach” to focus students’ attention on “what do you want out of life 

and what can I do to help you get there.” Respondent testified, “It is basically 

communicating with them to achieve in life. . . . A lot of times they don’t really know 

what they want to do. In an inner city, lower income environment there are always 

exceptions but usually a lot of the kids just want a job to make ends meet. I 

understand that from where I was born and raised. I want them to see past that and 

see they have no limits just because they come from here. You want to make sure they 

9 

can see past their own environment. The only limits are the ones they put on 

themselves. That’s my approach.” 

26.  Michael Pass, whom respondent mentored at Ayala in 2012, testified 

favorably about respondent’s interaction with students. “Students loved coming to his 

class because he was authentic with them. He spoke their language. He was convivial 

with them. . . . He absolutely conducted himself professionally with students. He was 

able to strike a balance. I learned from him how to maintain respect for authority as a 

teacher while respecting students. . . . Its reciprocal authority.” 

27. 

The impact of respondent’s teaching philosophy is reflected in 

unsolicited messages of appreciation several District students sent respondent in 

October 2014, April 2015, February and November 2017, and July 2019, which were 

collectively entered in evidence as Exhibit E. The following is a representative 

exemplar: 

Hey Mr. Myers I just really wanted to thank you! I have 

accomplished the biggest goal in my life that I’d NEVER 

believe I could in a million years! 2010 of my junior year is 

when I took a tour to University of La Verne with your Avid 

class. I know that the trip was probably just a part of your 

curriculum, but I’ll never forget the tour because since then 

I knew that this is where I needed to be. After graduating 

from Ayala I was homeless, and kinda still am, due to my 

Grandfather “Papa” getting very sick, I had no support, nor 

any shelter for almost 2 yrs. I moved back to Inglewood and 

seeked shelter from a few childhood friends, my boyfriend 

at the time and parents that I’d babysit for. I managed to 

10 

graduate from El Camino College in Torrance, June of this 

year while working 2 jobs. Besides all of the trials that came 

with me trying to stay above water and graduate, I still 

managed to transfer to ULV, I’m guessing you know I’m 

here now. Saying all this to say, I wouldn’t be here if it 

weren’t for you! Your, “not taking anyone’s shit” (scuse ma 

french) attitude really molded me to be stronger than I 

knew I could. You really forced me to appreciate the talents 

and skills that I have, and that’s a lot coming from parents 

who only communicate to me on a conditional basis! Your 

class not only taught me how to be an organized leader, 

but to be fast paced, appreciative, thorough, efficient, and 

clear. Not to mention I had a great benefit from having you 

for English as well, so I may be meshing the two together 

lol! Seriously, thank you! I’ve came a longggg way, and 

there were plenty of other options, but I decided to follow 

my dreams….I love it here at ULV, the school is the best in 

California for Child Development Majors, I have a 

scholarship, and I’m involved in a little too many 

clubs/activities, I’s love for you to attend my graduation 

June of 2016!! I still can’t believe I’m a junior here! Sooo, 

from the bottom of my heart, I just want to Thank you, thou 

may not think you’ve done anything, but trust me, you have 

For everything!! [emoji heart and happy face] 

(Exh. E at p. 3 [B11].) 

11 

28. 

Respondent has a history of deficiencies while he was teaching at Don 

Lugo. On June 6, 2016, the District issued to respondent a Notice of Unsatisfactory 

Performance and Unprofessional Conduct Pursuant to Education Code section 44938 

(2016 Notice), which details the following deficiencies: 

(a) 

On December 17, 2015, respondent sent messages from his personal 

Twitter account during his preparation period. 

(b) 

On January 2, 23, and 24, 2016, respondent attended the AVN Adult 

Entertainment Convention in Las Vegas, Nevada. Respondent posted on his personal 

Twitter account pictures of himself with adult entertainers and pictures of several adult 

entertainers whose commentaries were linked to sexually explicit or pornographic 

material. Unbeknownst to respondent, his personal Twitter account was accessible to 

the public. Several of respondent’s students at Don Lugo who followed respondent on 

his personal Twitter account without his knowledge disseminated the pictures, 

commentary, and links to other Don Lugo students. 

(c) 

During a discussion of Shakespeare’s Romeo and Juliet respondent made 

statements to the effect that male actors “not having their balls dropped” played 

female roles. 

(d) 

Respondent slapped the back of a student’s neck, a gesture known as 

“necking” and undertaken to communicate the recipient of the slap said or did 

something considered foolish, thus provoking laughter. 

29. 

The 2016 Notice directed respondent to correct the above four 

deficiencies in his conduct within 45 days of the notice and deficiencies in his 

performance within 90 days of the notice. Among other rules, regulations and 

procedures governing respondent’s conduct and performance as a District certificated 

12 

 
 
 
 
employee, the 2016 Notice reminded respondent of District Board Policy 4119.21: 

Rules of Conduct for Professional Educators and District Board Policy 4119.26: 

Employee/Student Interaction, both of which were provided to respondent when he 

initially commenced his employment with the District, as discussed in Factual Findings 

20 and 21. 

30. 

The 2016 Notice additionally provided respondent with the following 17 

enumerated Directives for improving his conduct and performance: 

1. Conduct yourself in a professional manner, in speech and 

action, at all times while on campus or while interacting 

with students, staff, or families. 

2. Be mindful of your public role as a teacher and your 

commitment to modeling appropriate behavior for your 

students, even outside the classroom. 

3. Provide a positive learning environment for your 

students, bult on a climate of respect and fairness. 

4. Use instructional time for instruction. Do not engage in 

personal entertainment such as accessing social media, 

personal email or personal websites during class time. 

5. Refrain from inappropriate physical contact with students. 

6. Refrain from making sexual, derogatory, denigrating, or 

other inappropriate comments to students, staff, or others. 

/// 

13 

7. Refrain from using profanity and language that could be 

interpreted as offensive in the presence of students. 

8. Refrain from discussing topics with students that are 

outside of the District’s approved curriculum, including but 

not limited to sexually related topics. 

9. Refrain from sharing personal information with students. 

10. Be honest in all communications with District personnel. 

11. Utilize good professional judgment at all times. 

12. Effectively utilize instructional time to ensure 

instructional goals are met. 

13. Develop and consistently utilize an effective, positive 

classroom management system. 

14. Ensure your students are on task and follow-up with 

students who have been redirected. 

15. Comply with all directives of the District and site 

administrators, including directives given to you in 

classroom observations summaries and evaluation. 

16. Keep social media accounts private and do not allow 

students to fraternize with you. 

17. Prior to the commencement of the 2016-2017 school 

year, meet with your supervisor to review District 

14 

expectations for professionalism, including appropriate 

interactions with students, staff, and community members. 

(Exh. 9 at p. 9 [A150].) 

31. 

Assistant Superintendent Rideout’s testimony established none of the 17 

enumerated Directives addresses (a) respondent’s use of legal marijuana, (b) former 

adult District students’ observation of respondent’s use of legal marijuana, or (c) 

respondent’s use of legal marijuana with former adult District students. 

32. 

Assistant Superintendent Rideout specifically addressed Directive number 

1, which requires respondent to conduct himself “in a professional manner.” Assistant 

Superintendent Rideout invoked Standard 1 of the California Standards for the 

Teaching Profession to explain how articulating a definition of “good professional 

judgment” is challenging because “it is a difficult concept to get across to people.” He 

nonetheless testified, “When we refer to judgment, we typically refer to things that are 

in the best interest to take care of the health and welfare of the students.” He noted “it 

is more easy to say what is not good judgement” with regard to specific conduct in a 

particular case but “if you are looking for what is a defining line in all cases that would 

be a difficult one to define in one synopsis because each situation provides detail and 

context that is different from the other one.” 

33. 

Assistant Superintendent Rideout addressed Directive number 2, which 

requires respondent to model appropriate behavior. Assistant Superintendent Rideout 

testified discerning what constitutes appropriate behavior ”would be circumstantial.” 

He testified, “An exact definition for all situations I would not be able to provide.” 

Asked how an educator is expected to predict ahead of time which conduct falls in the 

appropriate behavior category, Assistant Superintendent Rideout testified, “They 

15 

should through their training, their credentialling program, their knowledge of the 

California Standards for the Teaching Professions, and the trainings that the District 

has provided.” Neither party offered the California Standards for the Teaching 

Profession in evidence. 

34. 

Assistant Superintendent Rideout’s testimony established the 17 

enumerated Directives “remain in place in perpetuity.” 

35.  During the 45-day improvement period, a summer school substitute 

principal reported observing respondent shouting, “Don’t go into the classroom when 

there is no one there,” to a student in the presence of parents, classified staff, and 

another student. As a consequence, on August 17, 2016, the District issued to 

respondent a 45-Day Improvement Plan Status Report notifying him his conduct 

violated the Directives set forth in the 2016 Notice. At hearing, on cross-examination, 

Assistant Superintendent Rideout acknowledged District rules forbid students’ 

unsupervised presence in classrooms. 

36.  During the 90-day improvement period, an administrator at Don Lugo 

reported respondent (a) did not monitor students engaged in student group activities 

when only one or two of five to six groups of students actually worked on an assigned 

activity and (b) respondent did not enforce written rules prohibiting cell phones, food, 

and beverages in the classroom. As a consequence, on October 24, 2016, the District 

issued to respondent a 45/90-Day Improvement Plan Status Report notifying him his 

conduct violated the Directives set forth in the 2016 Notice. 

37. 

After October 2016, there were no other allegations respondent violated 

the Directives set forth in the 2016 Notice. Respondent continued discharging his 

duties and teaching responsibilities at Don Lugo. Among other things, respondent and 

16 

his colleague Annette Deming served as class advisors for the Don Lugo Class of 2017. 

Ms. Deming testified, “He is a great, agreeable man. He gave me wings to fly. He was 

very easy to work with. Kids liked him. . . . I never knew Mr. Myers to act 

unprofessionally toward students or colleagues. I think he is a very competent teacher. 

He was tasked with working with the most challenging students at Don Lugo. He has a 

way of commanding the room and making his expectations known. He was given 

classes with lower socioeconomic students. He had a way of speaking with them.” 

38.  On a date not established by the evidence, respondent applied for a 

transfer from Don Lugo to Chino High School. John Miller, the principal at Chino High 

School, knew “there was an issue [respondent] had at Don Lugo” after speaking to the 

Don Lugo principal about respondent but “didn’t get all the particulars of it.” Principal 

Miller understood “there was some social media usage involved and it wasn’t a good 

situation,” respondent “was disciplined over it and served the time,” and respondent 

“was trying to move forward from it.” Principal Miller thought “maybe we can give him 

a fresh start at Chino High School.” Principal Miller asked Don Lugo’s principal about 

respondent’s “pedagogy and how he was as a teacher.” Principal Miller learned Don 

Lugo’s principal “had good things to say” about respondent’s teaching and ability to 

relate with colleagues. Principal Miller also recollected a summer school substitute 

principal told him the “only knock” against respondent is “he could have been more 

flexible handling late student work” otherwise “he was a solid instructor.” Principal 

Miller testified, “I thought this would be a good fit for us.” 

39. 

In 2018, on a date not established by the evidence, the District 

transferred respondent’s work site to Chino High School, where his duties and 

responsibilities included teaching, among other courses, English Language Arts. 

17 

40. 

In his English Language Arts courses, respondent engaged students in 

Socratic seminars discussing articles, books, social issues, or “things that would be in 

the news.” Respondent understood student debate about topical issues as consistent 

with California teaching standards. At hearing respondent explained, “With debates 

and Socratic seminars there are standards dealing with speaking and listening, 

research, writing, and reading informational materials.” Respondent described how he 

conducted his Socratic seminars testifying, “Usually students sit in a circle and the 

teacher is on the outside the circle . . . observing the discussion which is pretty much 

student led. . . . Generally, debate topics could be anything controversial.” 

41. 

Respondent had no specific recollection of any Socratic seminar 

discussing the legalization of marijuana. He testified, “Thinking back specifically to 

Chino High School in 2019, I don’t remember discussing marijuana specifically, but we 

did talk about issues like gun control and abortion. So, I wouldn’t be surprised if 

legalization of marijuana would be one of those [debate topics]. Debates likely focused 

on the pros and cons of marijuana legalization and age limits.” 

42.  No District official advised respondent not to use marijuana as a debate 

topic. 

43. 

Respondent credibly testified he never discussed his personal marijuana 

use with students in any of his classes. 

44. 

A Chino Valley Unified School District Teacher Evaluation Form with 

Rubric, which both respondent and a vice principal in charge of evaluating English 

teachers signed on April 9, 2019, establishes for the 2018-2019 school year respondent 

received an overall evaluation rating of “Meets Element Expectation(s)” at Chino High 

School. (Exh. C.) At hearing, Principal Miller could not recollect any complaints against 

18 

respondent as a teacher at Chino High School. “There was nothing that jumped out at 

me in terms of Mr. Myers.” 

The April 2019 Marijuana Incident 

45. 

In each of his four years as a Don Lugo student, N. was enrolled in classes 

respondent taught. Over time, respondent noted “an honest, fairly close relationship 

where he can come to me to talk” developed between N. and respondent. N. was a 

known to smoke marijuana. Respondent testified, “In his particular class there were a 

number of open smokers. I didn’t demonize it. I told them they were old enough to 

know the health effects. Just don’t let it take over your life. They knew I was open to 

smoking marijuana because I just didn’t demonize it. They knew I wasn’t adversely 

negative about it.” 

46.  N. graduated from Don Lugo in June 2018. On a date not established by 

the evidence, N. sent respondent a friend request on Snapchat. Respondent accepted 

because, as he explained, “[N.] already graduated from high school.” Respondent and 

N. kept in touch. N. informed respondent about what was going on in his life. They 

explored getting together but could not find a mutually agreeable time. 

47. 

April 20 is known as “weed day” among cannabis advocates. On Saturday, 

April 20, 2019, N. invited respondent “to hang out” with him and C., another Don Lugo 

graduate. Respondent testified, “They were going to play me some of their music. We 

were going to smoke and listen to their music. So, I knew marijuana would be 

involved.” Respondent accepted the invitation and drove to a residence where he 

picked up N., C., and a third individual who attended but did not graduate from Don 

Lugo and who at the time was not a matriculated District student. From the residence, 

respondent drove to a park where the four spent two hours listening to music and 

19 

smoking marijuana in his parked car. Respondent knew N. and C. had prescriptions for 

medical marijuana because, unprompted, they both announced it in his class when 

they turned 18 years old. Respondent assumed the other accompanying individual also 

had a prescription for medical marijuana “because he was their [meaning N. and C.’s] 

peer.” 

48.  N. asked to video respondent smoking and respondent consented. N. 

“snapped” the video, which was immediately posted on social media. Against the 

backdrop of music, the video depicts respondent seated inside a smoked-filled vehicle 

with three occupants. One occupant makes an obscene gesture with his hand to the 

camera. Another occupant smokes a marijuana cigarette then passes it to respondent, 

who in turn holds it up to the camera before proceeding to smoke. An occupant 

cheers, “Mr. Myers, yaah!” (Exh. 6.) The video was uploaded to Snapchat with the 

caption “Do y’all smoke wit your fav teacher 4/20 tho?” (Ibid.) 

49.  On Monday, April 23, 2019, the video was anonymously disseminated, 

using AirDrop, a feature for transferring documents, pictures, videos, and other files, to 

the cell phone of students attending Chino High School. At hearing respondent 

testified, “When I first found out the video was making the rounds I felt embarrassed 

because students were viewing an aspect of my personal life and I like to keep my 

personal and professional lives separate. . . . Current students saw the video and think I 

was smoking with current students. I don’t want to students to think it is okay to party 

with students. It undermines integrity in the classroom. . . . I don’t want students’ 

opinion of my personal life to impact their opinion of my professionalism.” 

/// 

/// 

20 

The District’s Investigation of the April 2019 Marijuana Incident 

50. 

“That video became very prominent on campus,” Principal Miller testified. 

Principal Miller was initially concerned the three individuals occupying the car with 

respondent were “possible students or at least student age” because “they looked kind 

of young” and respondent was “hot boxing” with them. 

51. 

Based on his experience as an educator, Principal Miller was concerned 

about “the disruption” the video caused. Principal Miller explained, “We have parents 

that had seen it and had commented to me about it. It was just worrisome that his 

effectiveness as a teacher and his credibility with his students would be in jeopardy 

based on their seeing that. . . The optics of that looked so bad it kind of put our school 

in a bad light in terms of the community. We are a pretty close-knit community out 

here in Chino. The town is not very large. I always joke around that everybody knows 

each other, and everybody’s business is everybody’s business in Chino. It was a 

concern that people may be questioning the integrity of our school and our staff with 

that.” 

52. 

Principal Miller opined even if respondent were sitting in the car alone 

smoking marijuana, respondent’s conduct was still a concern. “If he is sitting in a car 

alone that is not a problem in of itself. If there is a video of one of our teachers 

smoking weed in a car and it is being Airdropped and the students are sharing it back 

and forth that is a concern for me.” Principal Miller opined whether or not respondent 

consented to sharing the video, “it still disrupted the education environment.” 

53. 

Principal Miller explained how the video was disruptive. He testified, 

“When students are in class the idea is they are working on language arts, math, 

science, social science, not Airdropping videos to each other and sharing videos. That’s 

21 

a disruption of the school activities. . . . And that kind of behavior [meaning smoking 

marijuana] is not what we want to promote to the kids. . . . It is our goal to hire 

teachers who are mentors for students, who students look up to and want to be like 

them. . . . There should be a level of professional behavior and when that is 

compromised, which I believe this video did compromise that, it disrupts the 

environment. It has students doing things like Airdropping the video in class when 

they should have been reading and writing and learning.” How long the “disruption” 

lasted at Chino High School was not established by the evidence. 

54. 

Principal Miller noted respondent knew he was being filmed. “I would 

say, ‘What were you doing being there, being allowed to be videoed.’ That is a concern 

knowing what I know working at a high school and students videoing things and 

putting them out. It may not be a good situation to put yourself in.” 

55. 

Principal Miller testified he received “emails from parents worried about 

disruption of the educational environment and the effect that would have on students’ 

grades and student achievement.” The emails Principal Miller claimed receiving from 

parents were not among the documents entered in evidence at the hearing. 

56. 

Up until the time of the April 2019 marijuana incident, Principal Miller 

held a “favorable opinion” of respondent. Principal Miller testified, “He was good for 

us. He did a great job. Our particular population can be a challenge to work with 

sometimes based on our students’ socio-economic demographics. We often need 

teachers who are willing to think outside the box in their instruction and really work 

hard and Mr. Myers did that for us. He even took on a national honor society 

advisership role for us. Because of this incident, and the severity of it, I felt having him 

back here would be too much of a distraction based on how many people we believed 

had seen that video. It is kind of weird to say it, but he was great for us. He embraced 

22 

the fresh start, a new start from his time at Don Lugo. Up until this point we were 

going pretty good. There was an issue with him and another staff member where I 

thought the other staff member was inappropriate with him in a meeting in my office 

and he handled it very professionally. And then this incident happened. It kind of just 

went from zero to 100. We really enjoyed our time with Mr. Myers and thought our 

kids were benefiting from his instruction.” 

57. 

Principal Miller notified the District’s Human Resources department 

about the April 2019 marijuana incident and “asked them to take over the situation” 

because “it definitely needed to be looked into.” The District placed respondent on 

paid leave and assigned a long-term substitute teacher to assume respondent’s 

instructional responsibilities for the remainder of the 2018/2019 school year. While on 

leave, respondent provided lesson plans to assist the substitute teacher and 

“continued the educational environment for students.” Principal Miller testified, “We 

were very appreciative of that. . . . It is not guaranteed you will get a substitute teacher 

that knows the content area, so they will often need help. Mr. Myers was helpful that 

way for us.” 

58. 

Francisco Arce, who was the District’s Director of Human Resources at 

the time of the April 2019 marijuana incident, watched the video and concluded he 

“had to investigate what exactly transpired and whether or not that was within our 

expectations for professional standards.” During his review of respondent’s personnel 

files, Director Arce discovered the 2016 Notice. He noted, on one hand, the Directives 

included in the 2016 Notice are “specifically related to or tailored based on the matter 

at hand,” meaning respondent’s prior deficient conduct or performance discussed in 

Factual Finding 28. But Director Arce also characterized the 2016 Notice “as a 

23 

significant item” related to the District’s investigation of the marijuana incident 

because “all of the Directives are within the expectations for professional standards.” 

59.  Director Arce explained, “If another incident or another situation should 

surface after [the 2016 Notice], it is very common practice that Human Resources and 

members of management to reference the Directives that were provided in a notice of 

unprofessional conduct within a reasonable amount of time. From my perspective a 

notice of unprofessional conduct that had these specific Directives, and that was 

provided to him in June 2016, should still have the merit, the importance, the impact 

as it relates to an incident that occurred only about two years later. Some of the 

Directives from 2016 were relevant in this particular case.” 

60.  On May 2, 2019, in the presence of respondent’s union representative, 

Director Arce interviewed respondent. Director Arce asked respondent about the video 

and for his response to allegations of “inappropriate fraternization with students 

and/or previous students.” Respondent acknowledged his awareness of the video and 

told Director Arce one of the former students posted the video. Respondent further 

acknowledged the video showed him smoking marijuana with his former students. 

According to Director Arce’s testimony, respondent “responded in the affirmative” 

when asked “if it was his perception that it is okay to smoke with recently graduated 

students.” Respondent informed Director Arce none of his current Chino High School 

students “brought up the video to him.” Director Arce reminded respondent of the 

Directives in the 2016 Notice and asked respondent whether his behavior captured in 

the video complied with Directives 1, 2, 10, and 16 (see Factual Finding 30), which 

Director Arce deemed “relevant to the issue at hand.” Respondent answered yes and 

noted his conduct involved adult, former students who were adults at the time of the 

incident. 

24 

61. 

At hearing, Director Arce opined on respondent’s demeanor during the 

interview stating, ”I was certainly convinced Mr. Myers had absolutely no remorse and 

no regrets related to this incident at hand. As a matter of fact, it was very concerning 

to me that Mr. Myers response was it is legal, and it is okay; they are former students 

and its okay. I quite frankly expected a different response. One of remorse, and that 

was not the case.” 

62.  Director Arce noted the April 2019 marijuana incident “was not too 

removed from the time when marijuana use for recreational purposes was no longer 

considered illegal” but he nonetheless deemed the April 2019 marijuana incident 

concerning. He articulated his concerns in a variety of ways. In one instance, Director 

Arce testified, “My concern was that the statement he made to the effect that these are 

graduated students, this is not illegal so its okay raises a few flags for me. I found out 

during the investigation that, actually as it relates to legal aspects of it, you have to be 

21 to engage in smoking marijuana for it not to amount to an illegal or illicit situation. 

The fact that his response was, ‘They are graduated students. They are not current 

students,’ gave me cause for concern. He seemed to really focus on the fact that these 

were former students and didn’t seem to make the connection to the fact that these 

were recently graduated students. Yes, adults. But still not of a legal marijuana 

smoking age. There seems to be a really lack of understanding the implications of his 

behavior, of being regretful or remorseful.” Director Arce did not specify the 

“implications” for which he asserted respondent lacked understanding. 

63. 

In another instance, Director Arce articulated his concern about the April 

2019 marijuana incident testifying, “The concerns that really stood out for us was the 

fact that this incident was captured in a social media video that was then being shared 

by multiple other students, including at the school where Mr. Myers was teaching; that 

25 

multiple community members were aware that this was going on. From the 

perspective of leadership at Chino Valley Unified School District, this was not up to par 

with the professional expectations that we have for teachers.” 

64.  Director Acre additionally testified it was concerning the April 2019 

marijuana incident involved “fraternization” with former students. “One of the 

concerns was that Mr. Myers, in his formal role as teacher, is privy to a lot of 

information related to students. He talks to students on a daily basis, and in that role 

and those types of conversations can determine which of his students engage in 

smoking marijuana. So, one of the concerns for us was if he identified these students 

in high school and then established a friendship and a relationship with them based 

on the fact that they were students who engaged in this kind of thing and that he 

would like to engage in this kind of thing with them. If that was the case that would be 

unprofessional. As school leaders we are tasked with trying to make sure our staff are 

positive role models for students and that they do not in any way take advantage of 

students and what they share as they go through our learning and education system.” 

65.  No evidence offered at hearing proved Director Arce’s concern that 

respondent fraternized with or groomed students to gain information for the purpose 

of taking advantage of them. 

66.  Director Arce also testified, “The concern at hand was never whether Mr. 

Myers smoked legal marijuana for recreational purposes outside of the school campus. 

The concern was smoking marijuana with recently graduated students, allowing 

yourself to be videoed engaging in this kind of behavior, and that obviously having 

some kind of negative implication in school settings as well.” 

/// 

26 

67.  Director Arce admitted he was unaware of any District training or policy 

promulgated following the legalization of marijuana to address the conduct of District 

employees with recently graduated students. Director Arce also admitted the District 

did not issue any warnings against, or expectations for, respondent’s conduct with his 

former students. 

68.  Director Arce maintained, however, District Board Policy 4119.21 imposes 

ethical standards applicable to respondent’s conduct with recently graduated students. 

He testified, “From our perspective we entrust teachers to have good judgement and 

make good decisions. Specifically, after getting a notice of unprofessional conduct that 

alludes to maintaining the highest of ethical standards, exhibit professional behavior, 

and things of that nature. Teachers are entrusted to make those types of decisions and 

know that it would probably be a bad idea to smoke marijuana with recently 

graduated students and allow themselves to be video recorded. . . . From our 

perspective it is not something of a high professional standard.” 

69.  He further maintained District Board Policy 4119.21 specifically indicates 

employee conduct should enhance the integrity of the District. “From our perspective 

his engagement smoking marijuana with students who are recently graduated does 

not enhance the integrity of the school district. It does not put his actions in a positive 

light. That does not rise to a high level of ethical standards.” 

70.  Director Arce determined investigatory interviews were needed “to get 

more knowledge about what [Chino High School] students had seen from the social 

media post.” Principal Miller assisted Director Arce to identify 21 students from 

different classes and with varied backgrounds, interests, and experiences at Chino High 

School. Principal Miller explained, “We wanted to see just how pervasive this was 

throughout the school. . . . Was this something just Mr. Myer’s students knew about? 

27 

Not only his current students for that year but maybe students from other classes that 

are coming into his classes in the future. How widespread was this?” Principal Miller 

thought it appropriate to determine whether students “have preconceived, negative 

connotations for [respondent] if they got placed in his class the following year.” 

71. 

Almost all 21 student interviewees either heard about or had seen the 

video. Interviewees commenting on the status of the three individuals with respondent 

in the car described them using phrases like “students,” “former students,” “young kid,” 

“the kids were graduated already,” “kids who graduated high school already,” and “old 

students.” 

72. 

The interviewees’ regard for respondent’s conduct smoking marijuana 

with the three individuals in the car varied from “I believe that teachers should not 

behave that way, especially with their students. They need to know what’s crossing the 

line and know when things aren’t okay.” to “I did find it kind of odd how he as teacher 

was doing such an act but did not take it to mind since he did not do it while he was 

teaching. . . . As a teacher he should be more cautious of his behavior,” to “[U]pon 

seeing the video I was not shocked because it seemed like something he would do,” to 

“In my opinion, if the students were older than 18 and graduated I think it’s okay. If 

they’re still in high school and younger than 18 it’s not okay,” to “I never thought it 

was nothing bad[.] They should’ve not record[ed] him but that was outside campus[;] it 

was on his free time,” to “he can do whatever he want[s] with his free time as long as it 

doesn’t affect his work from smoking.” (See Exh 5 at pp. 12 [A103]-32 [A123].) 

73. 

At hearing, Principal Miller acknowledged “it was a mixed bag” whether 

the student interviewees at Chino High School thought respondent’s conduct was 

“inappropriate.” 

28 

74.  Director Arce learned the identity of the three individuals in the car with 

respondent. He confirmed all three individuals were age 18 or older and no longer 

enrolled in the District. Two of the three individuals had been students in classes 

respondent taught at Don Lugo. Director Arce conducted a telephone interview of one 

of the three individuals, who informed him they were “grown ass men.” That individual 

additionally informed Director Arce they smoked marijuana obtained with a medical 

card from a dispensary prior to respondent’s arrival at the residence. 

75. 

Because two of the three individuals were respondent’s former students, 

Director Arce surmised respondent groomed or befriended and established a prior 

relationship with them, knowing they were marijuana smokers, so that he could smoke 

with them after they graduated Don Lugo. Director Arce testified, “I recall there being 

some student statements that caused concern for us because the statements were 

related to something to the effect of Mr. Myers speaking his mind in regard to 

marijuana and how he felt it would be okay to smoke and kind of encouraging 

students to know that he would be okay with that. In our mind that is not appropriate 

discourse to be having in an educational setting. It is not related to the standards he is 

teaching so there is no real reason to engage with students on topics related to 

whether or not he would smoke with them.” 

76. 

The student comment Director Arce referenced states, “There was this 

video of Mr. Myers smoking with 3 students in the care on 4/20. I got it from twitter 

while I was at [illegible] many people posted it. I couldn’t believe Mr. Myers did that 

with students and let it himself be recorded but it didn’t surprise me because Mr. 

Myers would be like very open in class and say things that would give us a bad vibe. 

He would talk about how smoking would be okay he would talk to student how he 

would do it.” (Exh 5 at p. 12 [A103].) 

29 

77.  Director Arce did not seek any verification of the statements attributed to 

respondent as asserted by this one student out of approximately two dozen students 

selected from an unknown student population for the investigatory interviews. 

78.  Director Arce prepared a June 18, 2019 Investigation Report in which he 

concludes the allegation “Mr. Myers was unprofessional in his conduct by engaging in 

smoking marijuana with former Chino Valley Unified School District students; former 

students who are not yet of legal age to smoke marijuana” was “substantiated.” (Exh. 5 

at pp .2-4 [AA93-A95].) Director Arce further concludes “this matter is something that 

multiple students and community members are aware of.” (Exh. 5 at p.4 [A95].) In 

addition, “Mr. Myers had received previous directives in a Notice of Unprofessional 

Conduct dated June 6, 2016, which he has failed to follow. . . . More specifically, Mr. 

Myers has been insubordinate by not abiding by the . . . directives provided him in his 

Notice of Unprofessional Conduct dated June 6. 2016[.] . . . The District feels that Mr. 

Myers lacks the professional judgement to carry out his duties at any of our school 

sites without having interactions with students that would have a negative impact on 

this role as an educator in our District.” (Ibid.) Director Arce recommended dismissal of 

respondent from his position as a teacher in the District. 

79. 

At hearing, Assistant Superintendent Rideout explained the District 

“looked at the process of going through termination” and engaged respondent in 

conversations. Assistant Superintendent Rideout testified, “We had a conversation 

related to it would be mutually beneficial to part ways. In this case, Mr. Myers and us 

agreed it would be mutually beneficial, and he ended up resigning with a settlement 

agreement.” Assistant Superintendent Rideout further testified, “This video was seen 

by everybody. It was one of those things where Mr. Myers himself was willing to make 

a fresh start and we offered an amount to make that happen, where he could move on, 

30 

and we wouldn’t have to go through the entire termination process. . . . We let Mr. 

Myers know what our intent was going to be. We would have much rather used the 

funds we were going to use to go down that termination route to help him land softly 

somewhere else.” 

80. 

Assistant Superintendent Rideout additionally explained the District 

considered but determined not to issue another notice of unprofessional conduct to 

respondent. He testified, “In this case, it was a little difficult seeing how widespread 

this was and being that we already had Mr. Myers on a notice of unprofessional 

conduct. We are really looking at judgment related issues. In terms of the District’s 

position, we really couldn’t see putting Mr. Myers back into a classroom. This was a 

pretty big deal.” 

81. 

According to Assistant Superintendent Rideout’s testimony, the District 

made a connection between respondent’s prior history of deficiencies in the District 

and the April 2019 marijuana incident. “We looked at the entire history with Mr. Myers. 

Some of the images going back to the 2016 case, I believe, had to do with a 4/20 party 

or something like that. There were postings from people whose accounts he 

connected with that referenced 4/20. So, now we had an ongoing pattern of 

desensitizing our kids to this type of imagery and this type of conduct. That crossed 

over with students in the classroom in the last case that had to do with marijuana, 

where he spoke about his beliefs related to marijuana. The District had extreme 

concerns that this behavior was now more prevalent than him making an error to his 

Twitter account, which was his explanation back in 2016. ‘Look I did this stuff. I have 

my account. I thought it was private, but it was public.’ That was the summary of the 

2016. Then 2019 comes and the video, which is very clear that he is smoking with kids, 

and he admitted to us he is smoking with kids that were once his students at Don 

31 

Lugo. We had a real hard time seeing if we could put Mr. Myers back in the classroom. 

If we were going the 45/90 route we would have been considering putting him back in 

the classroom.” 

82. 

As set forth in Factual Finding 6, effective August 15, 2019, respondent 

voluntarily resigned from the District in accordance with the terms of a Resignation 

Agreement and General Release. 

Respondent’s Subsequent Employment as an Educator 

83. 

Subsequent to his resignation from the District, respondent served as an 

English Language Arts educator at Grace Yokley Middle School (Grace Yokley) in the 

Mountain View School District in the Spring semester of the 2019/2020 academic year. 

In an April 21, 2020 recommendation letter to “Whom it May Concern,” the principal at 

Grace Yokley provides the following assessment of respondent’s interactions with 

students he taught: 

Mr. Myers was an asset to educating our students. He 

consistently demonstrated excellent verbal communication 

skills, was extremely organized, met our deadlines in a 

timely manner, and worked tirelessly with each student 

placed in his charge. Because of his effectiveness, he was 

assigned additional responsibilities which he did with a 

welcoming attitude and with a high-level of proficiency and 

dedication. Mr. Myers always went above and beyond our 

expectations, and he was always willing to offer his 

assistance with students who needed extra help. He always 

32 

had an excellent rapport with students, teachers, and our 

staff. 

(Exh. D at p. 1 [B6].) 

84. 

Beginning with the 2020/2021 academic year, Magnolia Public Schools, a 

nonprofit organization, hired respondent to teach tenth and twelfth grade English at 

its Magnolia Science Academy-Santa Ana, which respondent testified is a Title 1 

school, meaning a school with a high percentage of students from economically 

disadvantage communities. Respondent testified Magnolia Science Academy “has its 

challenges,” but he likes working there. 

85. 

In a “To Whom It May Concern” letter, dated April 4, 2022, the Magnolia 

Science Academy English Department Chairperson, who observed respondent in 

classroom settings and discussed with respondent lesson plans, classroom strategies, 

and approaches to individual students, writes the following about respondent’s 

professionalism as an educator: 

In all my interactions with Mr. Myers, he demonstrates a 

high level of professionalism and competency. His 

dedication to his students, combined with his relentless 

pursuit of new knowledge and teaching strategies make 

him a very strong candidate for any teaching position, 

middle or high school. 

Our school is located in Santa Ana, with mobile home parks 

on three sides. I have heard many veteran teachers as well 

as administrators complain that our students are “difficult 

kids,” but I never heard anything like that from Mr. Myers. 

33 

He is a natural at effective classroom management. He 

seeks to understand the whole child, no matter what the 

student’s background may be. He has learned strategies 

and methods of teaching English learners, who make up a 

very high percentage of our student body. He does not shy 

away from contacting parent to both compliment and 

correct their child’s behavior and performance in class. . . . 

Last year 20% of the school’s student population consisted 

of students with IEPs, which is double the average in our 

local public school district. Mr. Myers works well with the 

special education teachers and paraprofessional assigned to 

work alongside him. He has demonstrated a talent for 

differentiating instruction to meet the needs of every 

student, including challenging those who perform well 

academically. 

(Exh. D at p. 2 [B7].) 

86. 

By his letter to the CTC, signed on November 29, 2021, respondent 

addressed the marijuana incident and his subsequent rehabilitative efforts and 

professional growth as follows: 

My status as a teacher in the state is now in jeopardy due to 

a foolish decision that I made over two years ago involving 

a night of ‘partying’ with a group of post-grad former 

pupils. 

/// 

34 

Due to completing a Professional Boundaries course several 

months ago, I have come to realize that the mistake made 

that night was not the result of a random, inane decision, 

but rather it was the culmination of allowing myself to 

become too involved in the lives of some of my former 

students over the past two decades. While there is nothing 

wrong with being available to former students who may 

approach you for job recommendations, proofreading 

needs, or just for life advice, there does need to be a line 

established separating that of being a professional mentor, 

of sorts, and being a personal friend. I realize that I broke 

that boundary and that the result caused me to be viewed 

more as a peer toward recently graduated students than as 

an older educator and role model in my community. 

I understand now that the recently graduated students were 

still part of the same peer group as the current students. By 

engaging in partying behavior with them like I did, I was 

inadvertently causing my current students to lose respect 

for me as their teacher and an authority figure in their lives. 

I have seen that outcome and I do not want anything like it 

to repeat. 

While I will always be available to future students as a 

professional resource, I can no longer be a trusted friend. 

Over the past year, this is the new approach that I have 

adopted towards the students who I now instruct (such as 

35 

refusing all inquiries by them to ‘friend me’ in the virtual 

place). My goal, as always, is to dedicate my various skills as 

a teacher to the education and empowerment of my “kids” 

so that each may pursue their own dreams and accomplish 

their own goals in their adult lives, a place where I may 

assist but never again intrude. 

(Exh. A.) 

Applicable Law 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Education Code (Code) section 44421, among other things, empowers 

the CTC to discipline a teaching credential as follows: 

The Commission on Teacher Credentialing shall privately 

admonish, publicly reprove, revoke or suspend for immoral 

or unprofessional conduct, or for persistent defiance of, and 

refusal to obey, the laws regulating the duties of persons 

serving in the public school system, or for any cause that 

would have warranted the denial of an application for a 

credential or the renewal thereof, or for evident unfitness 

for service. 

2. 

Code section 44345, subdivision (e), authorizes the Commission to deny 

an application for a credential, or the renewal of a credential, made by any applicant 

who “[h]as committed any act involving moral turpitude.” 

36 

3. 

“Unprofessional conduct” is conduct violating the rules or ethical code of 

a profession or which is unbecoming of a member of a profession in good standing. 

(Board of Education v. Swan (1953) 41 Cal.2d 546, 553.) The conduct in question must 

indicate unfitness to teach. (Perez v. Commission on Professional Competence (1983) 

149 Cal.App.3d 1167, 1174.) 

4. 

“Immoral conduct” has been defined generally as “that which is hostile to the 

welfare of the general public and contrary to good morals. Immorality has not been 

confined to sexual matters, but includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative 

of corruption, indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; or a willful, flagrant, or shameless 

conduct showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the 

community, and as an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public welfare.” 

(Board of Education of the San Francisco Unified School District v. Weiland (1960) 179 

Cal.App.2d 808, 811.) 

5. 

Conduct constitutes moral turpitude for the purpose of professional 

licensure “if it shows a deficiency in any character trait necessary for the practice of 

[the profession], (such as trustworthiness, honesty, fairness, candor, and fidelity to 

fiduciary duties) or if it involves such a serious breach of a duty owed to another or to 

society, or such a flagrant disrespect for the law or for societal norms, that [public] 

knowledge of the . . . conduct would be likely to undermine public confidence in and 

respect for the . . . profession. (In re Lesansky (2001) 25 Cal.4th 11.) 

6. 

“Evident unfitness for service” means “‘clearly not fit, not adapted to or 

unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of temperamental defects or 

inadequacies.’” (Woodland Joint Unified School Dist. v. Commission on Professional 

Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444.) Evident unfitness for service connotes a 

37 

fixed character trait, presumably not remediable merely on receipt of notice that one's 

conduct fails to meet the expectations of the employing school district. (Id.) 

7. 

“Persistent defiance” is more than a single violation of, or refusal to obey, 

the school laws or reasonable regulations prescribed by the governing board of a 

school district employing a teacher. (Oakdale Union School Dist. v. Seaman (1972) 28 

Cal.App.3d 77.) Persistent violation of, or refusal to obey, a district’s governing board’s 

reasonable regulations requires a “showing of intentional and continual refusal to 

cooperate.” (San Diego Union High School District v. Commission on Professional 

Competence (1985) 174 Cal.App.3d 1176, 1196.) 

8. 

Abstract characterization of a teacher’s conduct as “unprofessional” or 

“involving moral turpitude,” for example, is an insufficient basis for discipline. 

(Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 235.) A rational connection 

or nexus must exist between alleged misconduct and competence or ability to teach 

effectively. The determinative test is whether conduct demonstrates unfitness to teach. 

(See Board of Education v. Jack M. (1977) 19 Cal.3d 691.) Unfitness to teach is a 

question of ultimate fact. (Id. at p. 698, fn. 3.) 

9.  Morrison identifies several relevant factors, formally codified at California 

Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80302, for determining unfitness to teach. They 

are as follows: the likelihood the conduct may have adversely affected students, fellow 

teachers, or the educational community, and the degree of adversity anticipated; the 

proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct; the type of credential held by the 

person involved; the extenuating or aggravating circumstances surrounding the 

conduct; the praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the 

conduct; the likelihood of recurrence of the questioned conduct; the extent to which 

disciplinary action may inflict an adverse impact or chilling effect upon the 

38 

constitutional rights of the person involved, or other certified persons; and the 

publicity or notoriety given to the conduct. 

10. 

All Morrison factors need not be present to reach a determination 

regarding fitness to teach. In other words, an item-by-item analysis of each established 

individual fact is not required. Rather, Morrison calls for a comprehensive analysis of 

the accumulated established facts. (Woodland Joint Unified School Dist. v. Commission 

on Professional Competence, supra, 2 Cal.App.4th at 1457.) 

Standard and Burden of Proof 

11. 

Complainant bears the burden of proving by clear and convincing 

evidence to a reasonable certainty respondent is unfit to teach. (Garner v. Commission 

on Professional Competence (1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035.) 

12. 

A “clear and convincing” evidentiary standard means complainant must 

establish the charging allegations by proof that is clear, explicit, and unequivocal; so 

clear as to leave no substantial doubt, and sufficiently strong to command the 

unhesitating assent of every reasonable mind. (In re Marriage of Weaver (1990) 224 

Cal.App.3d 478.) 

Discussion 

13. 

Complainant seeks revocation of respondent’s credentials to render him 

ineligible for employment as an educator in California based on allegations “on or 

about April 20, 2019, a video surfaced on social media that depicted Respondent 

smoking marijuana with multiple former students of the District.” (Exh. 1.) 

14. 

The fact of the video is not disputed. Respondent’s private conduct 

smoking marijuana as depicted in the video is not disputed. The three individuals with 

39 

respondent were adults 18 years of age or older. Although all three individuals 

formerly attended District schools, none was a matriculated student at a District school 

on April 20, 2019. Two of the three individuals graduated from Don Lugo, a District 

high school. Respondent and the three individuals smoked marijuana obtained with a 

medical prescription. 

15. 

Under the Compassionate Use Act of 1996, certain individuals meeting 

certain requirements can obtain and use marijuana legally with a doctor’s 

recommendation. (See Health & Saf. Code, § 11362.5 et seq.) The Adult Use of 

Marijuana Act (Proposition 64), effective November 9, 2016, legalized specified 

personal use and cultivation of marijuana for adults 21 years of age or older. These 

developments in California law more than suggest a stable consensus that medicinal 

and recreational use of marijuana is permissible as it is consistent with prevailing 

societal norms about rectitude, good order, and protection of public health, safety, 

and welfare. Conduct considered to be anathema yesterday may be socially acceptable 

today. (See Morrison v. State Board of Education, supra, 1 Cal.3d at p. 226.) In short, 

although personal attitudes may differ, adults may legally smoke marijuana. 

16. 

At hearing, as expressed through Director Arce’s testimony, complainant 

maintained the video of respondent’s private conduct smoking marijuana with recently 

graduated District students is a depiction of “unprofessional conduct.” (Factual 

Findings 62, 63, and 67.) Respondent’s actions cannot constitute unprofessional 

conduct unless his actions indicate his unfitness to teach. The same applies to 

complainant’s assertions in the Accusation alleging respondent engaged in acts 

constituting immoral conduct, moral turpitude, evident unfitness for service and 

persistent defiance. 

/// 

40 

17. 

In large measure, complainant relied on policies or standards 

promulgated by the District’s governing body to define and identify “unprofessional 

conduct.” Nothing in the sweeping language of those policies or standards, however, 

gives fair warning of specific kinds of conduct constituting “unprofessional conduct.” 

Related District training offered to its employees, including respondent, did not 

address District expectations for its certificated employees’ private legal conduct with 

graduated students in general, or expectations for engaging with graduated students 

in adult activities, including marijuana use, in particular. Yet, according to Director 

Arce’s testimony, there is some kind of notion or understanding that District 

employees are entrusted to discern the particular actions constituting “unprofessional 

conduct” through the exercise of “good judgment” and “good decision.” (See Factual 

Finding 68.) Such a notion fosters the uncertainty the Morrison court found 

condemnable when “unprofessional conduct” is identifiable only after it has occurred. 

“The knowledge that [a teacher] has erred is of little value to the teacher when gained 

only upon the imposition of a disciplinary penalty that jeopardizes or eliminates his 

livelihood.” (Morrison v. State Board of Education, supra, 1 Cal.3d at p. 231.) 

18. 

Based on Principal Miller’s testimony, complainant appeared to maintain 

unprofessional conduct in this case manifested as a “disruption of the school activities” 

or “disrupted educational environment.” (See Factual Findings 51 through 53.) 

Disruption resulting from knowledge or awareness of the video depiction of 

respondent’s private conduct smoking marijuana with adult graduated students is 

undisputed. Principal Miller’s testimony established students Airdropped the video 

during instructional time when they should have been reading and writing and 

learning. (Factual Finding 53.) No evidence established or even suggested the 

disruption had any long-lasting impact on or adversely affected the educational 

community. The video was a curiosity among the student population at Chino High 

41 

School, but no evidence of any related learning loss, for example, was presented at 

hearing. Principal Miller anticipated adverse consequences, including respondent’s 

“effectiveness as a teacher and his credibility with his students would be in jeopardy” 

and “people may be questioning the integrity of our school.” (See Factual Finding 51.) 

None of the evidence offered at hearing proved the realization those speculative 

consequences. 

19. 

Complainant additionally asserted respondent’s private conduct smoking 

marijuana with adult graduated students is part of a pattern of unprofessional conduct 

amounting to persistent defiance of the District’s prior notice, warnings, or reprimands 

for similar conduct. In support of this assertion, Assistant Superintendent Rideout 

invoked respondent’s Don Lugo deficiency arising from a social media post showing 

pictures of his activities at an adult entertainment convention and linked that 

deficiency to the April 2019 marijuana incident at Chino High School. He claimed 

observing a common reference to “4/20” in these matters and declared the existence 

of “an ongoing pattern of desensitizing our kids to this kind of imagery and type of 

conduct.” (See Factual Finding 81.) 

20. 

A three-year period of meritorious professional conduct interposed 

between the prior deficiencies and later-occurring April 2019 marijuana incident does 

not suggest any pattern of unprofessional misconduct. There is no evidence 

respondent intentionally and continually refused comporting himself with District 

warnings, reprimands, or notices, and in particular the 2016 Notice with its 17 

Directives during that time. There is no evidence respondent obstinately pursued a 

course of opposing action in violation of District policies and standards governing his 

conduct as an educator during that time. The assertion of a pattern of unprofessional 

conduct amounting to persistent defiance is unproven. 

42 

21. 

Complainant also asserted respondent’s three-decade-old criminal 

record as a basis for discipline of respondent’s credentials. The CTC has known about 

respondent’s criminal record since at least 1998 when it first granted a permit to 

respondent on an emergency basis. The CTC subsequently issued renewed permits to 

respondent and ultimately credentialed and recredentialed respondent multiple times. 

The reasonable inference drawn from these circumstances is that the CTC determined 

respondent’s criminal record did not render him unfit to teach. That record is 

unchanged and therefore not a basis for a different or contrary conclusion. Given the 

substantial passage of time, the evidentiary significance of respondent’s criminal 

record is diminished. (See Kwasnik v. State Bar (1990) 50 Cal.3d 1061.) 

22. 

Credible evidence established respondent is a competent classroom 

teacher. The Don Lugo principal “had good things to say” when asked about 

respondent’s pedagogy, according to Principal Miller. (See Factual Finding 38.) After 

imposition of the 2016 Notice and close out of the 45/90 Day Improvement Plan 

Status Report, the District returned respondent to the classroom at Don Lugo. A 

reasonable inference is the District did not consider respondent’s return to the 

classroom a risk to the District’s pupils or educational environment. Having resumed 

his teaching responsibilities at Don Lugo, respondent additionally served as one of two 

faculty advisors to the Don Lugo Class of 2017. 

23.  When respondent requested a transfer from Don Lugo to have a “fresh 

start,” the District obliged and transferred him to Chino High School. A reasonable 

inference is that the District would not have granted respondent a transfer if doing so 

were inconsistent with District responsibilities for its pupils. At Chino High School, 

respondent discharge of his teaching responsibilities merited a “Meets Expectation(s)” 

rating. Principal Miller reported respondent was “great” for Chino High School. 

43 

Respondent was “willing to think outside the box,” he worked “really hard,” and he 

acted “very professionally” with staff. (See Factual Finding 56.) Notably, Principal Miller 

reported when respondent was placed on leave during the District’s investigation of 

the April 2019 marijuana incident, respondent “continued the educational environment 

for students” by supplying lesson plans for his students. 

24. 

Since leaving the District, respondent has pursued teaching opportunities 

elsewhere. According to his immediate supervisor’s report, respondent continues to 

demonstrate competence in the classroom. He is dedicated to his students, he 

relentlessly pursues new knowledge and teaching strategies, and has a talent for 

differentiating instruction to meet the varying needs of children requiring 

individualized education plans. Absent any evidence of a deleterious effect on 

respondent’s competence as an educator, neither his prior history of deficiencies 

resulting in the 2016 Notice or the April 2019 marijuana incident, separately or in the 

aggregate, supports a conclusion respondent is unfit to teach. 

25.  Without doubt, respondent’s carelessness maintaining a strict zone of 

privacy between the personal and the professional revealed his peccadillos. District 

students, teachers, and administrators were perhaps more aware than they needed to 

be about respondent’s adult activities. That exposure understandably invited 

inappropriate probing and commentary laden with the personal value perspectives of 

commentators, including District officials, about respondent’s conduct derisively 

referenced as “this kind of behavior” and “that kind of behavior.” (See Factual Findings 

53, 64, and 81.) Having completed a course on professional boundaries, respondent 

has rezoned the borders demarcating with whom he pursues adult activities and the 

circumstances under which he makes his private adult activities accessible for public 

consumptions. (See Factual Finding 85.) Respondent’s carelessness is unlikely to recur. 

44 

26. 

As observed in Morrison, “The private conduct of a man, who is also a 

teacher, is a proper concern to those who employ him only to the extent it mars him 

as a teacher. . . . Where his professional achievement is unaffected, where the school 

community is placed in no jeopardy, his private acts are his own business and may not 

be the basis of discipline.” (Morrison v. State Board of Education, supra, 1 Cal.3d at p. 

225, citing Jarvella v. Willoughby-Eastlake City School Dist. (1967) 12 Ohio Misc. 288, 

233N.E.2d 143, 145-166.) 

27.  With respect to the First Cause for Discipline, complaint did not prove by 

clear and convincing evidence respondent committed acts of unprofessional conduct 

warranting discipline pursuant to Code section 44421 of all credentials, certificates, 

and authorizations issued to respondent.  

28.  With respect to the Second Cause for Discipline, complainant did not 

prove by clear and convincing evidence respondent committed act of immoral conduct 

warranting discipline pursuant to Code 44421 of all credentials, certificates, and 

authorizations issued to respondent. 

29.  With respect to the Third Cause for Discipline, complainant did not prove 

by clear and convincing evidence respondent demonstrated evident unfitness for 

service warranting discipline pursuant to Code section 44421 of all credentials, 

certificates, and authorizations issued to respondent. 

30.  With respect to the Fourth Cause of Discipline, complainant did not 

prove by clear and convincing evidence respondent committed immoral acts involving 

moral turpitude warranting discipline pursuant to Code sections 44421 and 444345, 

subdivision (e), of all credentials, certificates, and authorizations issued to respondent. 

45 

31.  With respect to the Fifth Cause of Discipline, complainant did not prove 

by clear and convincing evidence respondent intentionally and continually refused to 

obey prescribed District policies and standards warranting discipline pursuant to Code 

section 44421 of all credentials, certificates, and authorizations issued to respondent. 

ORDER 

The Accusation against Maurice Warren Myers in case number 2-

72314216 is dismissed. 

DATE: 

JENNIFER M. RUSSELL 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings

46 

02/15/2023 
 
 
 
