BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Accusation Against: 

CAROLYN RENEE WARREN, 

Clear Multiple Subject Teaching Credential, 

Respondent. 

Agency Case No. 2-285473772 

OAH No. 2022100792 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Administrative Law Judge Chantal M. Sampogna, Office of Administrative 

Hearings, State of California, heard this matter by videoconference on April 5, 2023. 

Deputy Attorney General Lisa A. Miller represented complainant Mary Vixie 

Sandy, Ed.D, Executive Director of the California Commission on Teacher Credentialing 

(Commission). 

Respondent Carolyn Renee Warren did not appear despite her receipt of timely 

and appropriate notice of the hearing. 

The matter proceeded as a default prove-up pursuant to Government Code 

section 11520. Testimony and documentary evidence was received from complainant. 

The record was closed and the matter was submitted for decision on April 5, 2023. 

SUMMARY 

Complainant alleges that during the four academic years spanning the fall of 

2017 through the spring of 2021, respondent engaged in unprofessional conduct, 

including multiple occurrences of being absent without notice and consuming 

intoxicants to the point she became unconscious in her classroom and unable to 

perform her job duties. Complainant further alleges aggravating factors, including 

respondent’s conduct constituted multiple acts of wrongdoing for which she had 

received prior warnings. 

Complainant established by clear and convincing evidence cause to revoke 

respondent’s teaching credential. Respondent did not appear at hearing and did not 

present evidence in her defense. Based upon the facts established at hearing, all 

credentials, certificates, and authorizations issued to respondent will be revoked. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Jurisdiction 

1. 

On May 17, 2013, the Commission issued Clear Multiple Subject Teaching 

Credential (credential) to respondent. The credential was in full force and effect at all 

times relevant to the charges brought herein and will expire on June 1, 2023, unless 

renewed. 

2 

2. 

Respondent previously held the following certification documents: 

Preliminary Multiple Subject Teaching Credential, issued on July 28, 2010, and valid to 

August 1, 2015; and a 30-Day Substitute Teaching Permit, issued on April 4, 2007, and 

valid to May 1, 2011. 

3. 

On July 29, 2022, complainant, acting in her official capacity, filed the 

Accusation. Respondent timely filed a Notice of Defense. 

Respondent’s Conduct Warranting Credential Discipline 

4. 

Two witnesses testified on behalf of complainant, Yesenia Diaz, an 

elementary school principal with the Palmdale School District (District), and Timothy 

Barker, the Director of Human Resources for the District. Principal Diaz was the 

Principal at Barrel Springs Elementary School (Barrel Springs) during the 2019-2020 

and the 2020-2021 school years. HR Director Barker has served as the District’s HR 

Director since July 2019. The witnesses’ credible testimony and the documents 

presented at hearing, including relevant absentee logs and photographs of alcohol 

bottles found in respondent’s classroom, established the allegations in the Accusation 

by clear and convincing evidence. 

5. 

At all times relevant to the allegations, respondent was employed with 

the District, assigned to Barrel Springs as a 5th grade teacher. 

FAILURES TO PROPERLY NOTIFY THE DISTRICT OF ABSENCES AND TO PROVIDE 

LESSON PLANS 

2017-2018 School Year 

6. 

During the 2017-2018 school year, on the following seven different 

occasions, respondent failed to provide advance notice of her absence at least one 

3 

hour prior to the start of the workday: October 6 and 26, 2017; November 2, 2017; 

January 9 and 29, 2018; and March 13 and 27, 2018. Respondent did not notify the 

District of her absences until after the school day had started and in some cases, after 

the school day had concluded. During the same school year, respondent also failed to 

prepare substitute lesson plans on the days she was absent. 

2018-2019 School Year 

7. 

During the 2018-2019 school year, respondent failed to report to work 

and did not notify the District at any time to arrange a substitute teacher on the 

following dates: December 13, 2018; and February 4 and 15, 2019. During the same 

school year, respondent notified the District of her absences less than one hour prior 

to the start of her workday on the following dates: September 14, 2018; and January 

14 and 17, 2019. In addition, on the following nine separate occasions, respondent 

failed to prepare substitute lessons for the days she was absent: November 14, 2018; 

December 13, 2018; January 17 and 24, 2019; and February 8, 14, 15, 21, and 22, 2019. 

8. 

On April 9, 2019, Tracey Webb, at the time the Assistant Principal at 

Barrel Springs, issued respondent a Letter of Warning, with directives to arrive at work 

on time, timely report any absences, and provide substitute lesson plans when absent. 

2019-2020 School Year 

9. 

During the 2019-2020 school year, Principal Diaz received more than ten 

complaints from students’ families regarding respondent’s failure to report to work 

and failure to let the students enter the virtual classroom on Zoom. Principal Diaz also 

received several complaints respondent failed to show up for virtual office hours to 

assist students and answer questions. Principal Diaz called respondent to discuss her 

conduct. Often respondent was unavailable; when respondent was available and spoke 

4 

with Principal Diaz, she would not acknowledge wrongdoing, but would say she would 

improve. Ultimately, Principal Diaz removed two students from respondent’s classroom 

following parents’ complaints of respondent’s absenteeism and nonresponsive 

behavior. 

10. 

Respondent’s conduct left her students unsupervised and without a 

teacher or instructional materials, causing her students to lose instructional time and 

leaving her students without a reliable and safe learning environment. To compensate 

for respondent’s unavailability, the Barrel Springs fifth-grade team of teachers 

provided instruction to respondent’s students via their own virtual classroom and 

provided instructional materials to respondent’s students by adding classwork to 

respondent’s Google Classroom or opening their own Google Classroom platforms to 

respondent’s students. The District was required to pay these teachers additional 

compensation for covering respondent’s duties. 

2020-2021 School Year 

11.  During the 2020-2021 school year, respondent was absent without notice 

on the following dates: January 29, 2021; and April 1 and 2, 2021. 

12. 

At the beginning of the 2020-2021 school year, Principal Diaz and 

Assistant Principal (AP) Wiseman scheduled individual meetings with the Barrel Springs 

teachers to review instructional plans and goals for the 2020-2021 school year. 

However, respondent failed to report to her August 2020 scheduled meeting. 

13.  On December 3, 2020, respondent failed to attend an annual staff 

meeting despite having volunteered to present at the meeting. Because of her failure 

to attend and present, Principal Diaz had to dismiss the staff members and reschedule 

the meeting. 

5 

CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOL DURING THE PERFORMANCE OF DUTIES 

14.  On May 3, 2021, following Barrel Spring’s resumption of in-person 

instruction, respondent released her students from class approximately 35 minutes 

early, at approximately 10:10 a.m., leaving them unsupervised in the dismissal area. 

15. 

At approximately 10:47 a.m., after learning that respondent had 

dismissed her students early, Principal Diaz checked on respondent in her classroom. 

Respondent informed Principal Diaz she did not feel well and wanted to work from 

home for the remainder of the day. 

16. 

Later that morning, AP Wiseman went to respondent’s classroom to 

check on her and knocked multiple times with no response. AP Wiseman observed 

respondent slumped over her desk in an unnatural position. Concerned, AP Wiseman 

entered respondent’s classroom and noticed that respondent appeared unconscious 

and noticed an odor that smelled like a mixture of alcohol and Lysol. AP Wiseman 

unsuccessfully attempted to wake respondent and called Principal Diaz over the radio 

for assistance. Principal Diaz responded to respondent’s classroom and unsuccessfully 

attempted to wake her. Principal Diaz went to find Health Assistant (HA) Arlene Lefeele 

for assistance with respondent. 

17. 

At approximately 11:45 a.m., Principal Diaz returned to respondent’s 

classroom with HA Lefeele. HA Lefeele was able to wake respondent, but respondent 

was disorientated and slurred her words. AH Lefeele called 9-1-1. When paramedics 

arrived, they asked respondent various identifying questions and respondent was only 

able to answer correctly as to her name. Principal Diaz asked respondent if she could 

look in respondent’s purse to ascertain if respondent was taking any medications. 

6 

After respondent nodded her head, Principal Diaz located a bottle of Lorazepam in 

respondent’s purse, along with an empty vodka bottle in respondent’s teaching bag. 

18. 

The paramedics informed Principal Diaz it appeared respondent had 

taken Lorazepam in combination with alcohol, which could result in an overdose; 

respondent’s open water bottle next to her chair contained vodka; and respondent’s 

breath smelled of alcohol. The paramedics transported respondent to the hospital. 

19. 

After respondent was transported to the hospital, Principal Diaz and AP 

Wiseman secured respondent’s classroom. They observed respondent had written the 

following nonsensical message on the classroom whiteboard: “finisishihffi EARTH 

SCIIIII.” Principal Diaz and AP Wiseman found an open can on respondent’s desk which 

contained vodka, and also found the following items: an empty travel-size bottle of 

wine in respondent’s desk; a plastic cup filled with vodka in respondent’s desk drawer; 

and another empty bottle of vodka in respondent’s mini-fridge. 

20. 

Following the incident on May 3, 2021, respondent failed to comply with 

multiple directives issued by HR Director Barker. HR Director Barker directed 

respondent to report to him at the District’s Human Resources Office (office) on May 

4, 5, and 6, 2021. On May 4, respondent signed in at the office, and then immediately 

left, failing to meet with HR Director Barker. Respondent did not report to the office on 

May 5 or 6, 2021. On May 5, 2021, against HR Director Barker’s direction to not report 

to Barrel Springs until after she had met with him, respondent walked on to the Barrel 

Springs’ campus and Principal Diaz had to direct her to leave and had respondent 

escorted off campus. 

21.  On May 12, 2021, respondent provided HR Director Barker with an 

unsigned medical note excusing her from work from May 3 through 7, 2021. The 

7 

medical note was admitted pursuant to Government Code section 11513, subdivisions 

(c) and (d). No testimony was provided authenticating the letter and the letter is 

unsigned. The letter alone is not reliable and will not be relied on to establish 

respondent was not able to work from May 3 through 7, 2021. (Gov. Code, § 12513, 

subd. (c).) The contents of the letter do not supplement or explain the evidence 

presented and are insufficient to support a finding respondent was unable to report to 

work between May 3 and 7, 2021. (Id. at subd. (d).) 

22.  On July 7, 2021, the District served respondent with a Proposed Notice of 

Intent to Immediately Suspend Without Pay and Dismiss. Respondent resigned from 

the District effective July 29, 2021. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

Commission’s Authority 

1. 

Established by the Bergeson Act (Ed. Code § 44200, et seq.), the 

Commission’s primary function relates to the licensing and development of 

professional standards for public school teachers in California. (§ 44225.) 

(Undesignated statutory references are to the Education Code.) 

Burden and Standard of Proof 

2. 

Complainant bears the burden of proving the existence of grounds for 

disciplining respondent’s credentials and must do so by clear and convincing evidence 

to a reasonable certainty. (Daniels v. Department of Motor Vehicles (1983) 33 Cal.3d 

532, 536 [“When an administrative agency initiates an action to suspend or revoke a 

license, the burden of proving the facts necessary to support the action rests with the 

8 

agency making the allegation”]; Gardener v. Commission on Professional Competence 

(1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1036, 1039-1040 [recognizing that the clear and convincing 

evidence standard applies to proceedings to discipline a teacher’s credential, whereas 

the lesser preponderance of the evidence standard applies to proceedings to dismiss a 

teacher from particular employment].) 

3. 

“The courts have defined clear and convincing evidence as evidence 

which is so clear as to leave no substantial doubt and as sufficiently strong to 

command the unhesitating assent of every reasonable mind. [Citations.] It has been 

said that a preponderance calls for probability, while clear and convincing proof 

demands a high probability [citations].” (In re Terry D. (1978) 83 Cal.App.3d 890, 899; 

italics original.) 

Cause to Revoke Credential 

4. 

The Commission must privately admonish, publicly reprove, revoke or 

suspend a credential for: immoral or unprofessional conduct; persistent defiance of, 

and refusal to obey, the laws regulating the duties of persons serving in the public 

school system; any cause that would have warranted the denial of an application for a 

credential, or the renewal thereof; or for evident unfitness for service. (§ 44421.) 

5. 

The Commission may deny any application for the issuance of a 

credential or for the renewal of a credential if the individual is addicted to the use of 

intoxicating beverages to excess. (§ 44345, subd. (c).) 

UNPROFESSIONAL CONDUCT 

6. 

Unprofessional conduct is “that which violates the rules or ethical code of 

a profession or such conduct which is unbecoming a member of a profession in good 

9 

standing.” (Board of Educ. of City of Los Angeles v. Swan (1953) 41 Cal.2d 546, 553 

[overruled by Bekiaris v. Board of Education (1972) 6 Cal.3d 575 on other grounds].) 

7. 

“. . . [T]he calling [of a teacher] is so intimate, its duties so delicate, the 

things in which a teacher might prove unworthy or would fail are so numerous that 

they are incapable of enumeration in any legislative enactment . . . the teacher is 

entrusted with the custody of children and their high preparation for useful life. His 

habits, his speech, his good name, his cleanliness, the wisdom and propriety of his 

unofficial utterances, his associations, all are involved. His ability to inspire children 

and to govern them, his power as a teacher, and the character for which he stands are 

matters of major concern in a teacher's selection and retention.” (Goldsmith v. Board 

of Education (1924) 66 Cal.App. 157, 169.) 

EVIDENT UNFITNESS TO TEACH 

8. 

Unfitness for service has been defined as a fixed character trait 

“presumably not remediable merely on receipt of notice that one's conduct fails to 

meet the expectations of the employing school district,” which demonstrates the 

teacher is “clearly not fit, not adapted to or unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by 

reason of temperamental defects or inadequacies.” (Woodland Joint Unified School 

Dist. v. Commission on Professional Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444.) 

9. 

Immoral conduct, unprofessional conduct, and moral turpitude cannot be 

the basis for removal of a teacher unless that conduct indicates the teacher is unfit to 

teach. (Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 229.) The Morrison 

criteria must be analyzed to determine whether the cited conduct indicates unfitness 

for service. (Woodland Joint Unified School Dist. v. Commission on Professional 

Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1445, citing Board of Education v. Jack M. 

10 

(1977) 19 Cal.3d 691, 696.) “If the Morrison criteria are satisfied, the next step is to 

determine whether the ‘unfitness’ is ‘evident’; i.e., whether the offensive conduct is 

caused by a defect in temperament.” (Id.) 

10. 

A court may determine unfitness after considering the most pertinent 

Morrison factors and is not required to make findings on all the Morrison factors. 

(West Valley-Mission Community College Dist. v. Concepcion (1993) 16 Cal.App.4th 

1766, 1777.) 

11. 

Factors that assist the Commission in determining whether the teacher's 

fitness and overall impact on the students are likely to meet the Commission's 

standards include the following: the likelihood the conduct may have adversely 

affected students or fellow teachers; the degree of such adversity anticipated; the 

proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct; the type of teaching certificate held 

by the party involved; the extenuating or aggravating circumstances, if any, 

surrounding the conduct; the praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives 

resulting in the conduct; the likelihood of the recurrence of the questioned conduct; 

the extent to which disciplinary action may inflict an adverse impact or chilling effect 

upon the constitutional rights of the teacher involved or other teachers; and the 

notoriety and publicity accorded to the conduct (Collectively referred to as “Morrison 

criteria” though established in additional regulatory and case law). (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 

5, § 80302, subd. (a); Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 229-30; 

Board of Education v. Jack M. (1977) 19 Cal.3d 691, fn. 5.) 

AGGRAVATING FACTORS 

12. 

California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80300, subdivision (b), 

defines “Aggravating factors” as follows: 

11 

[A]n event or circumstance which demonstrates that a 

greater degree of adverse action for an act of professional 

misconduct is needed to adequately protect the public, 

schoolchildren or the profession. Aggravating factors may 

include, but are not limited to, the following: ¶ . . . 

(2) that the misconduct evidences multiple acts of 

wrongdoing or demonstrate a pattern of misconduct; 

(3) that the misconduct was surrounded by or followed by 

bad faith, dishonesty or other violation of the laws 

governing educators; 

(4) that the misconduct significantly harmed a child 

entrusted to the care of a credential holder or applicant, 

significantly harmed the public or the educational system; 

[¶] . . . [¶] 

(6) that the holder or applicant had prior notice, warnings 

or reprimands for similar conduct from any reliable source. 

ANALYSIS 

13. 

Complainant established by clear and convincing evidence cause exists 

under sections 44421 and 44345, subdivision (c), to revoke respondent’s teacher 

credential. Between the fall of 2017 and spring of 2021, respondent’s conduct was 

unprofessional, she persistently defied and refused to obey the laws regulating the 

duties of persons serving in the public school system, and during this time she was 

addicted to the use of intoxicating beverages to excess. Respondent’s conduct was 

12 

egregious and harmed students; despite warnings, respondent did not remediate her 

conduct and did not establish sobriety or rehabilitation, demonstrating her behaviors 

have not been remediated and respondent is unfit for service. (Factual Findings 6-22.) 

Unprofessional Conduct 

14. 

Respondent’s conduct between the fall of 2017 and spring of 2021 

constituted unprofessional conduct. During this time, she repeatedly failed to show to 

work, provide reasonable notice of her absence, or to provide lesson plans. In addition, 

on May 3, 2021, respondent was present at work with students in her classroom while 

she was under the influence of intoxicating substances and unable to properly perform 

her job duties. Respondent’s conduct left the District and Barrel Springs with 

insufficient time to properly cover her absences and placed her students in an unsafe 

learning environment, without supervision, instruction, or instructional materials; as 

result of her conduct, respondent’s coworkers were required to perform respondent’s 

job duties. (Factual Findings 6-22.) 

Persistent Defiance 

15. 

Respondent repeated this conduct multiple times each school year, and 

failed to improve her conduct after receiving an April 2019 written warning. 

Respondent’s repeated failures to properly notify the District of absences and provide 

lesson plans was a persistent defiance of, and refusal to obey, the laws regulating the 

duties of persons serving in the public school system. (Factual Findings 6-13.) 

Addiction to the Use of Intoxicating Beverages 

16.  On May 3, 2021, respondent was present in the classroom with her fifth-

grade students while under the influence of alcohol and Lorazepam, wrote nonsensical 

13 

directions on the board, and then released her students 35 minutes early. She had 

multiple containers containing alcohol, and some empty alcohol bottles, located in her 

teaching bag, in her desk, and her classroom refrigerator, all within reach of herself 

and her students. Respondent ultimately became unconscious and nonresponsive and 

required medical assistance from paramedics. Respondent’s conduct on May 3, 2021, 

placed her students in an unsafe learning environment and without adult supervision. 

Respondent’s conduct on May 3, 2021, coupled with the multiple alcohol containers in 

her classroom, established by clear and convincing evidence respondent was addicted 

to the use of intoxicating beverages to excess. (Factual Findings 14-22.) 

Unfitness to Teach 

17. 

Respondent was entrusted with the custody of her young students and 

charged with the duty of teaching her students the information they needed to 

successfully complete the fifth-grade curriculum. Respondent’s conduct occurred less 

than two years ago. Respondent holds a clear multiple subject teaching credential, 

which, were she to maintain her credential, would place her in the classroom with 

children who require constant supervision and attention. (Factual Findings 1, 2, 11-20.) 

18. 

Respondent’s conduct adversely affected her students as they were left 

multiple times without supervision, instruction, or instruction materials, and some of 

her students were present with respondent while she was intoxicated and while open 

containers of alcohol were accessible to them. The degree of anticipated adversity is 

great. By repeatedly failing to properly call off from work and then, on May 3, 2021, 

dismissing her students early, respondent repeatedly left her students unsupervised 

and therefore in an unsafe learning environment. Recurrence of respondent’s behavior 

is likely. Respondent demonstrated addiction to alcohol to the point she was 

14 

intoxicated in the classroom, where she became unconscious, and has not presented 

evidence of sobriety or rehabilitation. (Factual Findings 6-22.) 

19. 

Respondent’s conduct included four factors in aggravation and 

demonstrates a greater degree of adverse action is needed to adequately protect the 

public, school children, and the profession. Respondent committed multiple acts of 

wrongdoing, demonstrating a pattern of misconduct. Respondent’s conduct between 

May 4 and 6, 2021, when she failed to report to the office but instead reported to 

Barrel Springs, in violation of HR Director Baker’s directions, demonstrated bad faith. 

Respondent’s conduct on May 3, 2021, significantly harmed students, placing them at 

significant risk of harm based on her intoxicated state and dismissing them without 

supervision; respondent’s conduct also significantly harmed her fifth-grade teacher 

team in spring of 2020 who repeatedly had to cover respondent’s job duties without 

notice or cause. Finally, respondent had prior warnings, and reprimands for similar 

conduct from her supervisors at Barrel Springs. (Factual Findings 6-22.) 

20. 

Sufficient evidence was not presented to assess praiseworthiness or 

blameworthiness. Generally, an individual cannot be blamed for their addiction, and 

without more evidence it is not possible to discern how much of respondent’s conduct 

was, possibly, a direct result of her active addiction. 

21. 

Imposing disciplinary action against respondent will not inflict an adverse 

impact or chilling effect upon the constitutional rights of respondent or other teachers. 

No evidence was presented regarding the notoriety and publicity accorded 

respondent’s conduct. 

22. 

Based on respondent’s unprofessional conduct, persistent defiance of, 

and refusal to obey, the laws regulating the duties of persons serving in the public 

15 

school system, respondent’s addiction to the use of intoxicating beverages to excess, 

and in consideration of the Morrison factors, including factors in aggravations, 

respondent is unfit to teach. Respondent’s credentials will be revoked. 

ORDER 

The Clear Single Subject Teaching Credential, and all credentials, certificates, 

and authorizations, issued to respondent Carolyn Renee Warren are revoked. 

DATE: 

CHANTAL M. SAMPOGNA 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings 

16 

Chantal Sampogna (Apr 27, 2023 14:41 PDT)04/27/2023 
 
 
