BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the First Amended Accusation Against: 

DAVID LEE SANDLES, Respondent. 

Clear Multiple Subject Teaching Credential (Expired) 

Clear Specialist Instruction Credential (Reading) (Expired), 

Respondent. 

Agency Case No. 2-75598363 

OAH No. 2022080310 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) Chantal M. Sampogna, Office of Administrative 

Hearings, State of California, heard this matter by videoconference on October 19 and 

20, 2022. 

Deputy Attorney General Matthew A. King represented complainant Mary Vixie 

Sandy, Ed.D, Executive Director of the California Commission on Teacher Credentialing 

(Commission).

Matthew Sean Harrison, Attorney at Law, Prometheus Civic Law, P.C., 

represented respondent David Lee Sandles.

Testimony and documents were received in evidence. The record was closed 

and the matter was submitted for decision on October 20, 2022. 

STATEMENT OF THE CASE 

On October 13, 2022, complainant issued the Accusation against respondent 

alleging cause to revoke his teaching credentials and certifications. Complainant 

alleges: (1) in 2002 respondent suffered a misdemeanor criminal conviction; and (2) 

respondent failed to report to work for the Bakersfield City School District between 

August 12 and September 5, 2019, due to purported illness while working for the 

California State University of Bakersfield (CSUB) during the same time period. 

Respondent timely filed a notice of defense. 

ISSUES 

1. 

Whether there is cause to discipline respondent’s credentials under 

Education Code section 44421 for: (1) unprofessional conduct; (2) evident unfitness for 

service; (3) immoral conduct; or (4) persistent violation or refusal to obey the school 

laws of the state or reasonable regulations prescribed for the government of the 

public schools by the State Board of Education or by the governing board of District. 

(Undesignated statutory references are to the Education Code.)

2.

Whether there is cause to discipline respondent’s credentials under 

sections 44421 and 44345, for committing acts involving moral turpitude.

///

2 

SUMMARY

Complainant alleged Respondent’s conduct at James Curran Middle School 

constituted multiple grounds for disciplining his credentials and certifications. 

Complainant further alleged a criminal conviction respondent incurred over 20 years 

ago as a ground for discipline. 

Respondent was employed by the District during the 2019-2020 academic year 

to teach at JCMS, Monday through Friday, during regular school hours. In July 2019, 

respondent accepted a full-time adjunct professor position with CSUB, agreeing to 

teach a course on Thursdays, 9:30 a.m. until noon, between August 26 and December 

18, 2019. The days and time of the CSUB teaching position overlapped with days and 

times respondent was scheduled to teach for the District.

Respondent applied for the CSUB job because he felt targeted and harassed by 

the District, specifically by its superintendent and the principal of JCMS. Between 2017 

and 2019, respondent and his wife had been outspoken at District Board meetings

against the superintendent and District Board policies. Though respondent established 

a negative work environment which caused him stress and became dissatisfying, 

respondent failed to establish the District or JCMS targeted or retaliated against 

respondent, or that respondent’s workplace caused him to be unable to perform his 

District teaching job duties for medical reasons. 

Complainant established the facts alleged in the Accusation by clear and 

convincing evidence. Respondent established mitigating factors, including his 15-year 

career teaching at Title I schools, serving low-income students and English Learning 

students with multiple educational and mental health challenges, and working in a 

3 

negative environment which caused him stress. However, respondent was dishonest 

with JCMS, the District, and with the Commission about the cause for his absence from 

work, his conflicting employment, and, in his 2021 application to renew his credentials, 

about whether his teaching credential had been subject to investigation or disciplinary 

action. 

Respondent’s claims of retaliation and the resulting stress and anxiety he 

suffered do not excuse his misconduct, especially to the extent it involved dishonesty 

and resulted in substantial expense to the District in fees for substitute teachers and to 

the students who lost continuity of teaching and related learning opportunities. His 

distress and anxiety as well as evidence of his committed and effective teaching under 

difficult circumstances do, however, warrant imposing discipline short of the most 

serious, revocation of his credentials and certifications. Because the criminal conviction 

is so remote in time and nothing in the record established respondent’s repeat of the 

underlying conduct, the criminal conviction does not establish cause for discipline. 

Considering the record as a whole, grounds exist to discipline respondent’s 

Clear Multiple Subject Teaching Credential and Clear Specialist Instruction Credential 

(Reading) credential (collectively, credentials) and the appropriate discipline is a one-

year suspension. Because his credentials are currently expired, the suspension period is 

stayed pending respondent’s petition to reinstate them. Respondent’s remaining 

credentials and permits remain revoked. 

/// 

/// 

/// 

4 

FACTUAL FINDINGS

Jurisdiction 

1.

On November 16, 2010, the Commission issued respondent a Clear 

Multiple Subject Teaching Credential which expired on December 1, 2020, and has not 

been renewed.

2. 

On July 6, 2011, the Commission issued respondent a Clear Specialist 

Instruction Credential (Reading) (reading credential) which expired on December 1, 

2020, and has not been renewed. 

3. 

Respondent previously held the following certification documents, each 

of which were revoked on January 16, 2022. 

a. Preliminary Multiple Subject Teaching Credential issued on March 21, 2005 

and expired on April 1, 2010. 

b. Emergency Long Term Multiple Subject Teaching Permit issued on February 

8, 2005 and expired on March 1, 2006. 

c. Emergency 30-Day Substitute Teaching Permit issued on July 30, 2001 and 

expired on August 1, 2002; reissued on September 17, 2002 and expired on October 1, 

2005. 

d. Emergency Long Term Single Subject Teaching Permit issued on April 23, 

2001 and expired on September 20, 2001. 

/// 

5 

4.

On March 25, 2021, the Commission received an online reissuance 

application for a Multiple Subject Teaching Credential. The Commission denied the 

credential application on January 16, 2022.

5. 

On March 25, 2021, the Commission received an online reissuance 

application for a Specialist Instruction Credential (Reading). The Commission denied 

the reading credential application on January 16, 2022.

6. 

On November 23, 2021, complainant, acting in her official capacity, filed 

the Accusation. Respondent timely filed a Notice of Defense. On October 13, 2022, 

complainant, acting in her official capacity, filed the First Amended Accusation, the 

operative pleading. 

Respondent’s Criminal Conviction 

7. 

On August 30, 2002, in 

 (Super. Ct. Kern 

County, 2002, No. BM629021A), respondent pled nolo contendere to, and was 

convicted of, violating Penal Code section 415, subdivision (2) (maliciously and willfully 

disturbing another person by loud and unreasonable noise), a misdemeanor. The court 

suspended imposition of sentence and placed respondent on three years’ court 

probation with terms and conditions including serving two days in county jail with 

credit for two days served and paying fines, fees, and restitution totaling $180. 

Respondent complied with the court’s orders, and, on May 5, 2020, the court 

dismissed the case pursuant to Penal Code section 1203.4.

8.

The circumstances underlying respondent’s criminal conviction occurred

on July 28, 2002. Respondent and his wife, Carrie Sandles, had an argument regarding 

parenting. Ms. Sandles walked toward the bedroom and picked up the phone to call 

6 

the police, but respondent took the phone from her. Ms. Sandles began walking away, 

down the hallway, and respondent followed her, kicking her right calf from behind, 

which caused Ms. Sandles to fall down. Ms. Sandles then attempted to exit their 

apartment, but respondent blocked her from leaving, and then left himself. Ms. 

Sandles called the police. As observed by the reporting police officers, Ms. Sandles had 

a red mark on her right calf from the kick. 

Respondent’s Teaching History 

9. 

Respondent worked for the District between 2004 and 2019 as an 

elementary school teacher, teaching 4th & 5th grades, a middle school teacher, 

teaching 6th grade English Learners, and as a Restorative Classroom Specialist, 

teaching 6th through 8th grades students. He enjoyed his work, teaching only at Title I 

schools, serving low-income students and English Learning students with multiple 

educational and mental health challenges. Respondent obtained his doctorate in 

education in 2013. 

10. 

In addition to fulfilling his teaching position, respondent was awarded 

Teacher of the Year (2008-2009); he established and volunteered for a districtwide 

spelling bee program (2005-2009) that produced five district champions, and coached 

the Kern County Champion to Scripp's National Spelling Bee; he received positive 

teacher evaluations; he conducted a district-wide summer institute training for more 

than 500 teachers; he was promoted from classroom teacher to Restorative Classroom 

Specialist (2015); planned and facilitated a school-wide "Citizenship Celebration" to 

acknowledge students who performed well as campus citizens (2018-2019); and was 

the team lead for JCMS’s Positive Behavioral Interventions and Supports (PBIS) 

inventory for which JCMS received a silver PBIS implementation award. 

7 

Respondent’s Evidence of Retaliation

11.

Between 2017 and 2019 the relationship between respondent and the 

District became contentious. At the Board’s May 2017 meeting respondent publicly 

voiced his disagreement with then-Superintendent Harry Ervin’s demotion of the then-

principal at JCMS. The following day, Superintendent Ervin came to JCMS to introduce 

the new principal, Polo Marquez, to the staff. Respondent testified the superintendent 

stood over respondent for up to 30 seconds and respondent found this to be 

intimidating. Despite this initial tension, during the 2017-2018 academic year, 

respondent had infrequent interaction with the newly assigned principal, Mr. Marquez.

12. 

At its January 2019 Board meeting, the District announced its decision to 

cancel summer school for 2019. Ms. Sandles spoke out against this plan at the 

meeting. Throughout the remainder of that school year, respondent and Ms. Sandles 

continued to publicly voice opposition to this plan and organized with community 

leaders to convince the District to offer summer school in 2019, a goal they ultimately 

achieved.

13. 

The evening of the January 2019 Board meeting Superintendent Ervin 

sent respondent an email, the contents of which were not presented at hearing; the 

following day he appeared in respondent’s classroom with a police officer, the reasons 

for which were not provided at hearing, and subsequently that same day sent another 

email to respondent regarding respondent and his PBIS team leaving campus to visit 

another school, action for which respondent had already received approval. That same 

month, the superintendent sent two additional emails to respondent regarding a 

parent complaint and a Categorical Notice of Possible Reassignment, informing 

respondent his position may be eliminated. 

8 

14.

Respondent again spoke out at the February 2019 Board meeting 

regarding the summer school issue and the need for teacher raises. In February 2019, 

Superintendent Ervin sent respondent an email stating he had concerns with 

respondent’s overall performance and how he speaks with students and directed him 

to speak with students only with a third person present. That month, respondent used 

a teacher’s assistant to cover his classroom while he met with a parent; in March 

Principal Marquez relieved respondent of his PBIS lead duties and directed him to 

remain in his classroom at all times. 

15. 

Beginning in October 2018, and throughout the 2019 spring semester, 

respondent and his colleague in the restorative classroom program, Quiana Roberts, 

raised the issue of the District’s failure to provide respondent a duty-free lunch to 

Principal Marquez: respondent was required to supervise students who served a form 

of detention during lunch time and was not provided any instructional relief during the 

school day, but Mr. Marquez did not address this concern. Ultimately, respondent’s 

union filed a complaint, and the issue was resolved in respondent’s favor with the 

District paying respondent more than $1,200 in compensation. 

16. 

Respondent maintained that Superintendent Ervin and Principal 

Marquez’s actions amounted to a sustained pattern of retaliation against him for his 

public statements against Board policies. In March 2019, he began seeing a therapist 

and doctor to help him address the pressures he felt from his workplace. 

/// 

/// 

/// 

9 

Respondent’s Violations of District Policies Regarding Sick-Leave and 

Performing Work for Other Agencies 

17.

Three witnesses testified on behalf of the Commission: Ilse Velasquez, a 

District Human Resources Technician II during the relevant time period; Mark Anthony 

Luque, the Superintendent of the District, but during the relevant time period a District 

Assistant Superintendent; and Christine Cornejo, District Assistant Superintendent of 

Human Resources. 

RESPONDENT’S REQUEST FOR SICK LEAVE

18. 

As a Human Resources Technician II, Ms. Velasquez managed absences 

for certificated staff and used the software, the Smart Find System, to hire substitute 

teachers and process medical leave. Teachers can use the Smart Find System to report 

absences and the cause for the absence and substitute teachers can use it to find and 

accept available substitute teacher assignments. When substitute teachers do not fill a 

vacancy, human resources technicians must locate substitute teachers to fill the 

teacher absence.

19.

At the beginning of the 2019-2020 academic year respondent was 

employed by the District and was assigned to teach a middle school class at JCMS. The 

assignment required him to teach Monday through Friday from 7:30 a.m. until 2:00 

p.m. Complainant presented a printout of respondent’s Smart Find System activity 

during the relevant time period (Exhibit 4). The printout shows on the school days 

occurring between August 14 and 29, 2019, respondent reported he was sick, and the 

District secured and paid a substitute teacher to fill respondent’s teaching assignments 

for those days. Ms. Velasquez testified the District pays middle school substitute 

10 

teachers at a rate of $135 per day. Though not evident from the printout, Ms. 

Velasquez testified, and respondent did not dispute, he reported being sick for all 

school days from August 12 through September 5, 2019. 

20.  On August 27, 2019, Ms. Cornejo wrote the following letter to 

respondent (Exh. 6): 

District policies and procedures require an employee to 

request an appropriate leave of absence in order to be 

excused for absences extending beyond ten (10) work days, 

and where applicable, to provide verification by a medical 

doctor. (See Board Policy and Administrative Regulation 

500.05, "Leaves of Absence - Certificated and Classified 

Service Employees.") 

It has been reported that you have been absent in excess of 

ten (10) work days, and you have not submitted a request 

for a leave of absence. If your absence is due to illness, you 

must also submit a medical doctor's verification and the 

estimated duration of your absence. For your convenience, 

we have enclosed a form that your medical doctor may 

complete and return to our office. If your absence is due to 

a reason other than illness, please contact our office so that 

we may provide you with additional information regarding 

leaves of absence. 

Please do not hesitate to call us at 631-4858 should you 

have questions regarding this matter. Currently, you are 

11 

absent without leave. Failure to comply with the above 

requirements within one week of the date of this letter shall 

constitute sufficient cause for dismissal, including but not 

limited to willful refusal to perform your regular assignment 

without reasonable cause.

21. 

Between August 26 and September 1, 2019, Ms. Velasquez also 

communicated with respondent, via email, about his need to comply with the District’s 

policy. Respondent initially provided a note signed by a physician’s assistant which 

only excused respondent between August 27 and September 2, 2019. On August 28 

Ms. Velasquez reminded respondent he must submit a form signed by a doctor which 

excused him from August 12, the first day of his absence, through to whatever day he 

anticipated he would return to work. On September 3, 2019, respondent submitted the 

required form signed by David Dougherty, M.D., excusing him from work between 

August 12 and September 14, 2019, because “[respondent’s] current medical condition 

precludes ongoing work at this time.” (Exh. 15.) 

RESPONDENT’S SIMULTANEOUS WORK FOR ANOTHER AGENCY 

22.  Mr. Luque testified at hearing regarding his discovery and confirmation 

of respondent’s employment with CSUB. As an assistant superintendent, Mr. Luque 

was responsible for, among other things, general education, special education, service 

programs, instructional programs, data assessment, summer programs, and family 

engagement. Mr. Luque has worked in public education for 25 years and with the 

District for nine years. In his capacity he was aware of the Board’s policies including 

the Board’s policy for obtaining sick leave as described by Ms. Velasquez. 

/// 

12 

23.

At the end of August 2019, Mr. Luque was reviewing Twitter posts from 

professional colleagues on his feed. He saw August 25, 2019, posts from Kristina 

LaGue, Ed.D., of CSUB’s 2019 new student convocation, and August 29, 2019, posts 

from Vickie Spanos, of CSUB’s teacher residency program. The posts consisted of three 

pictures of respondent wearing a professor’s gown and stole attending the 

convocation and three pictures of respondent in business attire and, per the 

information provided in the posts, teaching CSUB teacher residency students.

24. 

At the time Mr. Luque saw these posts he did not know respondent was 

on leave but wondered how he was performing this work while employed as a middle 

school teacher for the District. Mr. Luque was aware the Board’s policy prohibiting

teachers from failing to appear for District work to earn compensation in lieu of 

performing District responsibilities. Mr. Luque searched CSUB’s online teacher 

residency course schedule (Exhibit 8) and found respondent was listed as the course-

instructor for the “Science Methods and Assessment” course offered in-person on 

Thursdays, 9:30 a.m. until noon, during the fall semester, August 26 through December 

18, 2019. This teaching schedule conflicted with respondent’s District teaching 

schedule which runs Monday through Fridays, 7:30 a.m. until 2:00 p.m., except for early 

release days on Wednesdays. 

25.  Mr. Luque contacted Superintendent Ervin to discuss the matter. 

Superintendent Ervin brought the social media posts to Ms. Cornejo’s attention and 

asked her to follow up and investigate if respondent was teaching for CSUB while on 

sick leave. 

26. 

As the District’s Assistant Superintendent of Human Resources, Ms. 

Cornejo oversees human resource issues of District certificated and classified 

13 

employees, and she held this position during the 2019-2020 academic year. She 

affirmed Ms. Velasquez’s testimony that a certificated employee may use sick leave for 

a short absence by reporting his or her absence due to illness on a daily basis, but if 

the absence extends beyond 10 days the teacher must submit a doctor’s notification 

substantiating the sick leave. Teachers are on notice of the substantiation requirement 

because the District posts the requirement in multiple areas including on the Board 

website and within its human resource forms and posted regulations, and the 

requirement is included in the collective bargaining agreement. 

27.  Ms. Cornejo explained the District has a policy that requires teachers to 

inform the District if the teacher is working for another agency. The District does not 

prohibit teachers from working other jobs as long as they do not conflict with a 

teacher’s District assignment and many District teachers do work as adjunct teaching 

staff for other schools or employers under these circumstances. Even then, however, 

the District requires the teacher to inform it of the secondary job. The District does not 

allow teachers to take secondary jobs requiring attendance during times teachers are 

assigned to work at the District under any circumstances. 

28. 

Through her research Ms. Cornejo confirmed Mr. Luque’s findings that 

respondent was named in the CSUB schedule as an instructor teaching a course on 

Thursdays, from 9:30 a.m. until noon, hours which conflicted with his District teaching 

assignment. At approximately 10:30 a.m. on September 5, 2019, she and Mr. Luque 

went to Val Verde Elementary School, a school in the Greenfield Elementary School 

District where CSUB offered the teacher residency program, and through a door-

window observed Respondent teaching a classroom of CSUB students, adult teacher 

residency students. Both Ms. Cornejo and Mr. Luque observed respondent did not 

appear ill or incapacitated to work, nor did he claim he was. Ms. Cornejo called him 

14 

out of the classroom, introduced herself and directed him to come to her office that 

day, when he was done teaching, at 1:00 p.m. Respondent did not appear as directed 

but instead submitted an email informing Ms. Cornejo that effective 12:57 p.m. on 

September 5, 2019, he resigned from his position with the District.

29. 

Based on the Request for Medical Leave form respondent submitted, the 

District understood respondent was unable to work. Neither respondent nor the 

doctor requested an accommodation which might allow respondent to continue 

working for the District, and they did not place any conditions or qualifiers on 

respondent’s inability to work due to illness. Respondent also did not formally bring to 

the attention of the JCMS or the District that he was unable to return to work due 

workplace stressors or his feelings of being targeted and retaliated against. 

30. 

Respondent’s absences from work between August 12 and September 5, 

2019, totaling 18 school days, negatively impacted his students and the District. The 

District had to manage respondent’s absences and hire a substitute teacher for each 

day at a rate of $135 per day, and the students were not able to form a relationship 

with or establish consistency with a permanent teacher at the beginning of the 

academic year. 

Respondent’s Evidence 

RESPONDENT’S TESTIMONY 

31. 

Since resigning from the District, respondent continued to work with 

CSUB and, since 2020, has taken on additional assignments, serving as the CSUB 

Director of M.A. Education (Curriculum & Instruction), acting as CSUB’s Coordinator of 

Black Educator Teacher Residency, serving as CSUB’s Co-Chair of the 2021 Associate 

15 

Dean Search for the School of Social Sciences and Education, acting as the CSUB Team 

Lead for the Chancellor's Office Learning Lab Initiative, and serving on the Alumni 

Association Board of Directors. He is also a member of the Western Association of 

School and Colleges Accrediting Commission, reviewing other states’, including 

Nebraska, southern Texas, and New York, school performance. 

32. 

During his testimony, respondent expounded on his assessment the 

District was retaliating against him and the resulting impacts on his physical and 

mental health. He concluded the District’s actions were “spawned by forceful 

retaliation against him for championing rights of youth.” By the start of the 2019-2020 

academic year, he was “frightful and dispirited and unable to discharge his duties.” He 

began to have panic attacks, heart palpitations, depression, excessive irritability, and 

trouble sleeping. Respondent speculated Misses Cornejo and Velasquez and Mr. 

Luque’s actions were directed by Superintendent Ervin and were additional acts of 

retaliation, rather than acts of District employees carrying out their job responsibilities 

whose communications and actions were reasonable under the circumstances. 

33. 

Respondent asserted his medical release form was accurate as he could 

not perform the District assignment and the form does not ask about his ability to 

perform other work. He was treated by a doctor for his symptoms but remained 

unable to face returning to JCMS. Respondent diagnosed himself with Post-Traumatic 

Stress Disorder and Complex Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder. Respondent explained he 

chose to resign so he would not be required to bring his mental and physical health to 

the attention of the District because he did not want to share this information. For the 

same reasons, he did not submit medical records or call his doctor to testify at 

hearing. 

16 

34.

Although Respondent concluded he could not continue to work at JCMS,

he did not want to release his District tenured position and was worried about the 

potential financial ramifications. His District job paid $92,000 per year but the CSUB 

job paid only 60,000 per year. 

35. 

During his testimony, Respondent equivocated about whether he 

received pay from both the District for his sick leave and from CSUB for his adjunct 

professor work, pay from two employers for the simultaneous days and hours of work. 

Respondent initially testified he was not sure when he actually received pay for his 

CSUB work, but he finally acknowledged regardless of when he received his pay, he 

was paid by both jobs for conflicting work hours. 

36. 

Respondent did not acknowledge he was prohibited from working two 

jobs with simultaneous work hours and that he failed to disclose his work for another 

agency to the District. Respondent also failed to acknowledge that regardless of his 

described mental and physical struggles affecting his ability to report to his District 

assignment, it was not possible for him to report to his District assignment on August 

29 and September 5, 2019, because his CSUB class occurred on these same days 

during conflicting hours. 

37. 

Respondent acknowledged his criminal history. In 2002, he timely and 

accurately reported it to the Commission and neither the Commission nor the District 

raised it as any impediment to his credentials until the instant matter. Both he and Ms. 

Sandles testified about the incident. Ms. Sandles affirmed respondent’s testimony that 

such behavior has not reoccurred and that they had addressed their marital strain 

through marital counseling and the support of their family and friends. 

/// 

17 

38.

Respondent acknowledged his current work does not require a 

Commission-issued credential or certificate. However, his credentials hold value for 

him because he was the first person in his family to complete college and he obtained 

his credential as a working parent, which required financial and personal struggle. 

Further, if his credentials were revoked, it would inhibit future work opportunities and 

would affect his social cache. 

RESPONDENT’S CHARACTER WITNESSES

39. 

Respondent had four witnesses testify as character witnesses: Ms. 

Sandles; Quiana Roberts and Kempton Coman, former work colleagues; and Lori 

Pesante, a community organizer and friend.

40. Ms. Sandles corroborated respondent’s testimony regarding the physical 

and emotional effects of his work environment on him, including his inability to report 

to JCMS from August 12, 2019onward. Since respondent resigned from the District, 

she observed respondent’s health improve, though he is no longer a vociferous 

advocate anymore. 

41.  Ms. Sandles also described her participation at Board meetings and her 

efforts to maintain District offered summer school: she attended Board meetings, 

wrote letters to newspapers, canvassed neighborhoods to get signatures, and engaged 

in community organizing, some of which was covered by the local news, with the 

Dolores Huerta Foundation, a community advocacy group for quality education and 

the rights of students and farmworkers. Respondent asserted that Ms. Sandles’ 

advocacy was also the basis for the District’s and Mr. Marquez’s actions against 

respondent. 

18 

42. Ms. Sandles wanted respondent to resign from the District but was 

worried their family would not survive financially given the reduction in pay. As with 

respondent, she also believed respondent did everything he was required to do by 

submitting the medical form to the District. 

43.  Quiana Roberts is currently employed by the Kern High School District, 

but worked with respondent between 2014 and 2019 in the JCMS restorative 

education program. She is not a credentialed teacher, but rather provided mental 

health supports to the students. Ms. Roberts found respondent to be one of the best 

teachers she had met, noting his particular patience and effectiveness while working 

with challenged seventh and eighth graders. She was often in respondent’s classroom 

and regularly observed him not being provided a duty-free lunch, but rather observed 

him provide instruction and supervision throughout the entire school day. She also did 

not receive duty-free lunches which is why she left her job with the District. She 

observed that when Mr. Marquez began working at JCMS he treated respondent 

poorly and she concluded Mr. Marquez’s behavior was in retaliation for respondent’s 

opinions about District policies. 

44. 

Kempton Coman has been a restorative educator for over 30 years and 

worked with respondent between 2010 and 2017. Mr. Coman experienced treatment 

similar to that which respondent described. Mr. Coman was transferred to a different 

middle school because of issues he had with his principal and Superintendent Ervin. He 

found Superintendent Ervin to create a hostile work environment, telling teachers 

generally that he had the power to have their teaching credentials revoked. 

45. 

Lori Pesante works with the Dolores Huerta Foundation and is a parent in 

the District. During meetings at the foundation, respondent and Ms. Sandles shared 

19 

with her the difficulties respondent was having in the District. Ms. Pesante observed 

respondent’s stress when discussing his workplace and was distressed to hear of 

respondent’s experience because her husband had had similar workplace issues as a 

teacher in the District. 

Respondent’s Misstatements and Misrepresentations

STATEMENT TO THE COMMISSION

46.

In an eight-page letter to the Commission, respondent detailed his 

experience with the District and his basis for alleging retaliation. (Exh. 14, p. A147.)

As the 2019-20 school year approached, I was uncertain of 

whether to return to my position with [the District]. I felt as 

if Superintendent Ervin would continually target me 

because of my family's activism, but I also did not want to 

leave the profession I worked diligently to cultivate, a 

profession that yielded life-long friendships and that helped 

my wife and I rear our four children. In May of 2019, I 

applied for a position at California State University, 

Bakersfield. I did not believe I would even receive an 

interview, but I felt I needed to give myself potential 

options to the treatment I had received with BCSD. 

Ultimately, I was granted an interview with CSU Bakersfield 

and offered the position of full-time lecturer at the 

university.

///

20 

I accepted the position at CSUB to give myself an option, 

thinking I could later decide which position I actually 

wanted to consider. As the school year began with BCSD, I 

opted to utilize my accrued sick leave. I was unsure if I 

could return to that environment, but I wasn't sure I could 

leave my job of 15 years, either. I was in a definite 

quandary. After discussing the matter with my wife and my 

department chair, I decided I would resign on September 

5th. At 12:42 pm, I submitted my resignation letter to the 

district . . . .

47.

In his letter, Respondent did not disclose to the Commission that the 

work hours of the two positions conflicted, and he did not speak to or explain the fact 

that he submitted a medical form to the District claiming he was too ill to work, but 

rather wrote “he wasn’t sure if I could return to that environment.” (

.). He also 

misrepresented his decision to resign: he presented his decision as if he happened to 

speak with his wife on September 5, 2019, and decided that day to resign, failing to 

disclose the fact that on that day District administrators observed him teaching the 

CSUB class during a date and time he was contracted to teach for the District, that Ms. 

Cornejo directed him to meet with her after the class, and that rather than meet with 

Ms. Cornejo, he resigned within one-half hour of the class ending. 

APPLICATION FOR CREDENTIAL RENEWAL

48.  On October 1, 2019, the District sent the Commission a “Notice of 

Credential Holders Change of Employment Status” informing the Commission of 

respondent’s resignation and the surrounding events. On April 24, 2020, the 

21 

Commission sent respondent a letter informing respondent of its investigation and 

formal review of respondent’s conduct and that the Commission’s Committee on 

Credentials would determine whether “the information contained in the Confidential 

Investigative Report constitutes probable cause for adverse action,” and explaining an 

adverse action means respondent’s credential(s) may be “suspended, revoked, or 

denied, or [respondent would be] privately admonished or publicly reproved.” (Exh. 1, 

p. A55.) 

49.  On October 29, 2020, the Commission informed respondent the 

Committee found probable cause to revoke his credentials and that the adverse action 

would become effective within 30 days unless he requested reconsideration or an 

administrative hearing. On November 23, 2020, respondent, through counsel, 

requested reconsideration. On December 23, 2020, the Commission informed 

respondent the Committee sustained its previous decision. On January 28, 2021, 

respondent requested an administrative hearing to address the disciplinary matter.

50.  On March 25, 2021, and while the Commission’s investigation into the 

matters alleged in the First Amended Accusation was pending, respondent applied to 

the Commission to renew his Multi Subject Teaching Credential and his Specialist 

Instruction Credential (Reading) (Exh. 2). On page 1 of the application (Exh. 2, p. A84), 

the application asks: 

b) Conviction

Have you ever been convicted of any felony or 

misdemeanor in California or any other place? . . . .

c) Under Investigation

22 

Are you currently the subject of any inquiry or investigation 

by any law enforcement agency or any licensing agency in 

California or any other state? ¶ . . .¶

e) Credential Discipline

Have you ever had any credential, including but not limited 

to, any Certificate of Clearance, permit, Discipline credential, 

license or other document authorizing public school service: 

revoked, denied, suspended, publicly reproved, and/or 

otherwise subjected to any other disciplinary action 

(including an action that was stayed) for cause, in California 

or any other state or place? 

Respondent answered “Y” to question (b) but answered “N” to questions (c) and (e).

51. 

The First Amended Accusation did not allege, nor was it addressed at 

hearing, whether respondent provided misstatements or misrepresentation in his 

renewal application. Nonetheless, documentary evidence presented at hearing and 

summarized in Factual Findings 48 through 50 demonstrates by clear and convincing 

evidence that respondent did, in fact, misrepresent himself and provided 

misstatements in his renewal application to the Commission. Respondent was on 

notice of, and affirmatively requested an administrative hearing regarding, the fact his 

credentials were under investigation and were subject to disciplinary action, though 

not yet resolved, and yet he answered no to the questions inquiring about these 

issues. As found in jurisdictional documents included in Exhibit 2, pages A86-A95, this 

fact was not lost on the Committee as respondent’s failure to disclose was identified in 

the Committee’s findings of fact which formed part of the basis for the Committee’s 

23 

finding of probable cause to deny respondent's application and to revoke 

respondent’s credentials. (Exh. 2, p. A 95.)

Credibility Assessments 

52. 

In his defense, and which serves as a mitigating factor, respondent 

established he worked in an increasingly negative work environment, in which JCMS 

and District administrators gradually eliminated respondent’s leadership positions, and 

which required respondent to work without duty-free lunches in violation of the 

applicable collective bargaining agreement. However, respondent did not establish the 

District’s or JCMS’s actions were retaliatory. 

53. 

Respondent did not establish the District’s or JCMS’s actions were in 

response to respondent’s or Ms. Sandles’ advocacy, or that he attempted to 

meaningfully address his workplace concerns with the District or JCMS. Further, the 

negative and stress inducing work environment experienced by respondent was 

similarly experienced by two of respondent’s character witnesses, Mr. Coman and Ms. 

Roberts, but without connection to respondent’s actions or any alleged retaliation

against these witnesses. Finally, to the extent respondent is attempting to make a legal 

claim of workplace retaliation, these claims are not properly raised, as the matter to be 

addressed herein is a licensing matter raised by the Commission against respondent, 

not an employment matter between the District or JCMS and respondent. 

54. 

Respondent established through his own testimony and that of Ms. 

Sandles that his District work environment was no longer satisfying, and it caused him 

some stress and anxiety. However, respondent’s evidence in support of his alleged 

medical inability to return to his District position between August 12 and September 5, 

2019, is not credited. On the face of his Request for Medical Leave form the doctor 

24 

stated respondent’s current medical condition precludes him from ongoing work. The 

medical excuse is conclusive and unsupported by any explanation. In light of other 

evidence, particularly respondent's financial concerns and reluctance to leave a 

tenured position, it is insufficient to establish respondent was medically precluded 

from working at JCMS even as he worked at another job. Moreover, his failure to abide 

by the District's internal rules for engaging in secondary employment, his decision to 

resign from the District at the same time he was observed teaching at CSUB by District 

personnel, and his explanations to the Commission describing himself as "in a 

quandary" about which job to keep and that he was unsure if he could return to JCMS, 

belie his representation that he was too traumatized or otherwise infirmed to work at 

JCMS. 

55. 

The court in 

 (2008) 43 Cal.4th 201, 216-

217, concluded that an individual’s ability, during a time he seeks medical leave, to 

perform part-time work for a different employer, performing nearly identical tasks to 

those performed for his initial employer is strong evidence the individual was able to 

perform the full-time job from which the individual requested medical leave, but it is 

not dispositive. Rather, it raises a disputed issue of fact to be resolved at trial. 

56.

Respondent’s work for CSUB is strong evidence respondent was able to 

perform his District assignment, but it is not dispositive. However, in light of all the 

evidence presented, respondent was not persuasive that his stress and anxiety were so 

debilitating as to prevent him from reporting to his District assignment yet were nearly 

wholly relieved, or were relieved, when he attended to his CSUB duties. Respondent 

chose to not introduce evidence beyond his and his wife’s testimony supporting his 

claim that he could not, for medical reasons, perform his District teaching duties but 

could perform other teaching duties. Further, the evidence presented that in July 2019 

25 

respondent was conscious of the fact that he needed to choose between the two jobs, 

and that he delayed doing so out of financial concerns and overall hesitation to 

release his tenured position, and that he used his sick leave to postpone making a final 

decision. Nothing required him to maintain his employment with the District or to 

prolong his employment dilemma or the related stress. Respondent’s delay served him 

and harmed the District and his JCMS students. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

. Commission’s Authority 

1. 

Established by the Ryan Act (§ 44200 et seq.) (Act), the Commission’s 

primary mandate is to license public school teachers in California and develop and 

enforce their professional standards. (61 Ops.Cal.Atty.Gen. 353, (1978); see § 44225.)

2.

The expiration of any credential does not deprive the Commission of its 

authority to institute or continue a disciplinary proceeding against the credential 

holder upon any ground provided by law, or to enter an order suspending or revoking 

the credential. (§ 44440.)

Burden and Standard of Proof 

3. 

Complainant bears the burden of proving the existence of grounds for 

disciplining respondent’s credentials and must do so by clear and convincing evidence 

to a reasonable certainty. (

 (1983) 33 Cal.3d 

532, 536 [“When an administrative agency initiates an action to suspend or revoke a 

license, the burden of proving the facts necessary to support the action rests with the 

26 

agency making the allegation”]; 

(1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1036, 1039-1040 [recognizing that the clear and convincing 

evidence standard applies to proceedings to discipline a teacher’s credential, whereas 

the lesser preponderance of the evidence standard applies to proceedings to dismiss a 

teacher from particular employment].) 

4. 

“The courts have defined clear and convincing evidence as evidence 

which is so clear as to leave no substantial doubt and as sufficiently strong to 

command the unhesitating assent of every reasonable mind. [Citations.] It has been 

said that a preponderance calls for probability, while clear and convincing proof 

demands a 

[citations].” (

 (1978) 83 Cal.App.3d 890, 899; 

italics original.) 

Cause to Revoke Credential 

5. 

The Commission must privately admonish, publicly reprove, revoke or 

suspend a credential for the following reasons: immoral or unprofessional conduct; the 

persistent defiance of, and refusal to obey, the laws regulating the duties of persons 

serving in the public school system; any cause that would have warranted the denial of 

an application for a credential or permit; or for evident unfitness for service. (§ 44421.)

6.

The Commission may deny any application for the issuance of a 

credential if the applicant has committed any act involving moral turpitude or has had 

a document certification revoked. (§ 44345, subds. (e) & (f).) A denial of a credential for 

acts involving moral turpitude must be based on reasons related to the applicant's 

fitness to teach or fitness to perform other duties for which that applicant is 

certificated, or competence to perform the duties which the permit would authorize 

the applicant to perform. (§ 44345.)

27 

UNPROFESSIONAL CONDUCT

7.

Unprofessional conduct is defined in 66 Corpus Juris, p. 55 as conduct 

which violates “the rules or ethical code of a profession or such conduct which is 

unbecoming a member of a profession in good standing.” (

(1953) 41 Cal.2d 546, 553 [overruled by 

(1972) 6 Cal.3d 575 on other grounds].) 

8. 

“... [T]he calling [of a teacher] is so intimate, its duties so delicate, the 

things in which a teacher might prove unworthy or would fail are so numerous that 

they are incapable of enumeration in any legislative enactment . . . the teacher is 

entrusted with the custody of children and their high preparation for useful life. His 

habits, his speech, his good name, his cleanliness, the wisdom and propriety of his 

unofficial utterances, his associations, all are involved. His ability to inspire children 

and to govern them, his power as a teacher, and the character for which he stands are 

matters of major concern in a teacher's selection and retention.” (

(1924) 66 Cal.App. 157, 169.

IMMORAL CONDUCT 

9. 

The court in 

, (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, found a teacher had committed 

immoral conduct when she falsified attendance records to maintain her course during 

the next semester of instruction. In so finding, the court relied on the definition of 

immoral conduct as provided in 

 (1951) 36 Cal.2d 734, 

where the Supreme Court quoted with approval the following statement from Words 

and Phrases, permanent edition, volume 20, pages 159-160:

28 

The term “immoral” has been defined generally as that 

which is hostile to the welfare of the general public and 

contrary to good morals. Immorality has not been confined 

to sexual matters, but includes conduct inconsistent with 

rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, 

dissoluteness; or as wilful, flagrant, or shameless conduct 

showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable 

members of the community, and as an inconsiderate 

attitude toward good order and the public welfare. 

(Board of Education of the San Francisco Unified School District v. Weiland, supra, 179 

Cal.App.2d at p. 811) 

ACTS OF MORAL TURPITUDE

10.  Moral turpitude has been defined as acts which are contrary to “honesty 

and good morals” (

 (1990) 50 Cal.3d 1204, 1217-1218), and as acts of 

“baseness, vileness or depravity in the private and social duties which a man owes to 

his fellow men or to society in general, contrary to the accepted and customary rule of 

right and duty between man and man . . . .” (

(1968) 68 Cal.2d 67, 73 [citing 

 (1957) 48 Cal.2d 69, 70].) 

EVIDENT UNFITNESS TO TEACH

11. 

Immoral conduct, unprofessional conduct, and moral turpitude cannot be 

the basis for removal of a teacher unless that conduct indicates the teacher is unfit to 

teach. (

(1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 229.) 

29 

12.

A.

Evident unfitness for service has been defined as a fixed character 

trait “presumably not remediable merely on receipt of notice that one's conduct fails 

to meet the expectations of the employing school district,” which demonstrates the 

teacher is “clearly not fit, not adapted to or unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by 

reason of temperamental defects or inadequacies.” (

(1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444.) 

B. 

Factors that assist the Commission in determining whether the 

teacher's fitness and overall impact on the students are likely to meet the 

Commission's standards include the following: the likelihood the conduct may have 

adversely affected students or fellow teachers; the degree of such adversity 

anticipated; the proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct; the type of teaching 

certificate held by the party involved; the extenuating or aggravating circumstances, if 

any, surrounding the conduct; the praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives 

resulting in the conduct; the likelihood of the recurrence of the questioned conduct; 

the extent to which disciplinary action may inflict an adverse impact or chilling effect 

upon the constitutional rights of the teacher involved or other teachers; and the 

notoriety and publicity accorded to the conduct (Collectively referred to as “

factors” and further delineated in in regulation and in case law). (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, 

§ 80302, subd. (a); 

(1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 229-30; 

 (1977) 19 Cal.3d 691, fn.5.) 

C. 

Aggravating factors are events or circumstances which 

demonstrates that a greater degree of adverse action for an act of professional 

misconduct is needed to adequately protect the public, schoolchildren or the 

profession. Aggravating factors include the following: misconduct evidencing multiple 

acts of wrongdoing or demonstrating a pattern of misconduct; the misconduct 

30 

 
 
significantly harmed a child entrusted to the care of a credential holder or applicant, 

significantly harmed the public or the educational system; or the holder demonstrated 

indifference toward the consequence of the misconduct, which includes failure to 

comply with known court orders. (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80300, subd. (b).)

D.

A mitigating factor is an event or circumstance which 

demonstrates the public, schoolchildren and the profession would be adequately 

protected by a more lenient discipline or no discipline against respondent’s credential. 

Mitigating factors may include the following: the absence of any prior record of 

adverse action over many years of educational service, coupled with present 

misconduct which is not deemed most serious; a lack of harm to the person who is the 

object of the misconduct; emotional or physical difficulties suffered by respondent 

which substantially contributed to the misconduct if respondent has established 

through clear and convincing evidence that he or she no longer has such difficulties; a 

demonstration of good character of respondent attested to by references; objective

action taken by respondent, which spontaneously demonstrate remorse at the time of 

the misconduct and recognition of the wrongdoing, which is designed to timely make 

amends for the consequences of the misconduct; the proximity or remoteness in time 

relative to the seriousness of the misconduct; or the nature and extent of subsequent 

rehabilitation. (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80300, subd. (m).) 

E.

The 

factors must be applied to determine whether the 

cited conduct indicates unfitness for service. (

(1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1445, citing 

 (1977) 19 Cal.3d 691, 696.) “If the 

criteria are 

satisfied, the next step is to determine whether the ‘unfitness’ is ‘evident’; i.e., whether 

the offensive conduct is caused by a defect in temperament.” (

) 

31 

 
 
13.

A court may determine unfitness after considering the most pertinent 

 factors and is not required to make findings on all the Morrison factors. (

(1993) 16 Cal.App.4th 1766, 

1777.)

14. 

Only the likelihood that the teacher’s conduct may have adversely 

affected students and other teachers, and not actual adverse impact, needs to be 

found. (

Cal.App.4th 462, 477.) 

Analysis 

CRIMINAL CONVICTION

(2010) 184 

15. 

Complainant did not establish respondent’s 2002 criminal conviction 

constituted unprofessional conduct, immoral conduct, moral turpitude, a persistent 

defiance of and refusal to obey laws, or evident unfitness to teach. Based on the 

remoteness in time, the underlying criminal behavior and the absence of any similar 

conduct or subsequent criminal behavior, and in consideration of the 

factors, 

respondent’s criminal conviction does not constitute grounds for discipline. (Factual 

Findings 7-9, 37, 52-56.) 

UNPROFESSIONAL CONDUCT 

16. 

Complainant established by clear and convincing evidence respondent’s 

conduct constitutes unprofessional conduct. Respondent’s failure to comply with the 

District’s rules regarding working for another agency and using unwarranted sick leave 

to postpone his resignation while benefitting himself financially and harming the 

32 

District and his JCMS students was conduct unbecoming a teacher in good standing. 

Respondent was entrusted with the educational and mental wellbeing of his JCMS 

students. However, respondent’s conduct left his students for at least one month 

without a consistent teacher or classroom routine, both of which the students were 

due. (Factual Findings 17-56.) 

IMMORAL CONDUCT 

17. 

Complainant established by clear and convincing evidence respondent’s 

conduct constitutes immoral conduct. Respondent’s conduct was hostile to the welfare 

of the general public and contrary to good morals. Respondent presented dishonest 

medical information to the District to maintain his employment at, and income from, 

two employers while he continued to weigh his career options a month into the 

academic year, over a month after he knew he would have to choose between the two 

jobs. Respondent showed a moral indifference to the District’s rules and its attempts to 

uphold good order and was inconsiderate to the District and to his JCMS students.

(Factual Findings 17-56.)

PERSISTENT DEFIANCE OF RULES AND REGULATIONS 

18. 

Complainant failed to establish by clear and convincing evidence 

respondent’s conduct constituted a persistent defiance of, and refusal to obey laws 

regulating the duties of persons in the public school system. Respondent’s conduct was 

isolated in time and when faced with the knowledge the District knew of his work for 

CSUB, respondent resigned from the District. (Factual Findings 7-56.) 

/// 

33 

MORAL TURPITUDE

19.

Complainant established by clear and convincing evidence respondent 

committed an act involving moral turpitude. As provided in Legal Conclusion 17, 

respondent’s acts were dishonest and respondent’s submission of a dishonest Request 

for Medical Leave form in order to delay his inevitable decision about which job to 

maintain and which job to resign from, was contrary to the duties he owed to the 

District and the JCMS students. (Factual Findings 17-56.) 

EVIDENT UNFITNESS TO TEACH

20. 

Complainant failed to establish by clear and convincing evidence

respondent’s evident unfitness to teach. The evidence did not demonstrate respondent 

has a fixed character trait not remediable upon receipt of notice his conduct fails to 

meet expectations of the employing school district or that he is not fit, or is unsuitable 

for, teaching by reason of temperamental defects or inadequacies. Rather, the evidence 

demonstrated respondent had a fifteen-year career with the District, the first 13 of 

which were marked by quality teaching, leadership, and volunteering with his students 

to help them achieve educational accomplishments, without issues raised by the 

District. Respondent has continued his contribution to education, leadership, and to his 

community through his work with CSUB over the past three years. While not justified or 

excusable, respondent’s violative conduct is attributable to his increasingly negative 

work environment and removal from many of his JCMS duties, and to a weakness in 

character not previously or subsequently demonstrated. (Factual Findings 7-45.)

21.

It is likely respondent’s conduct adversely affected his JCMS students as 

he failed to report to work for one month and during this time did not provide the 

34 

District an opportunity to permanently fill his position though he likely knew he would 

not return to work for the District. However, any harm caused to the students was 

temporary and isolated in nature. Respondent’s conduct occurred three years ago. 

Respondent has a clear subject teaching credential and reading credential which have 

expired, and his remaining credentials, certifications, and permits were revoked by the 

Commission in January 2022. (Factual Findings 17-30.)

22. 

Though respondent’s conduct occurred over a one-month period, it 

presented as one event of misconduct, and not as multiple acts of wrongdoing or as a 

pattern of misconduct. Respondent’s conduct harmed the students entrusted to his 

care and the District, though the harm was not as significant as, for example, would be 

direct physical harm or emotional abuse. (Factual Findings 17-30.) 

23. 

Respondent is blameworthy for his motives resulting in the conduct, 

which included delaying a decision he knew he must make for a month into the 

academic year while he continued to weigh his options and receive income from both 

the District and CSUB, which were both compensating respondent for the same days 

and times of work. It is unlikely respondent’s conduct will recur. (Factual Findings 7-56.) 

24. 

Disciplining respondent’s credentials will not inflict an adverse impact or 

chilling effect upon the constitutional rights of respondent or other teachers. 

25. 

Beyond testimony about a few social media posts, evidence was not 

presented regarding the notoriety and publicity accorded to respondent’s violations. 

Aggravating Factors 

26. 

Respondent demonstrated an indifference toward the consequence of 

the misconduct, continuing to justify his behavior while failing to recognize the District 

35 

employees’ duties to investigate the matter, but instead considering this continued 

retaliation, and failing to acknowledge his duty to inform the District of his work for 

the CSUB. Respondent’s indifference went so far as to include multiple 

misrepresentations to the Committee and Commission in his written statement 

regarding the allegations and in his answers on his renewal application. Respondent 

has not demonstrated remorse for his actions. (Factual Findings 17-34.) 

Mitigating Factors 

27. 

In January 2022, the Commission denied respondent’s renewal 

application and revoked the permits and credentials identified in Factual Finding 3, 

constituting a prior record of adverse action. (Factual Finding 3.) This adverse action is 

based, however, on many of the facts presented in this matter. Over his 15 years of 

educational service, respondent has not otherwise been subject to adverse action.

28. 

Though dishonest and self-serving, respondent’s misconduct is not 

deemed the most serious, if for no other reason he did not directly harm any student 

physically or emotionally. Respondent was suffering emotional or physical difficulties 

which substantially contributed to the misconduct. Having found and maintained work 

elsewhere, respondent no longer has such difficulties. Respondent’s general good 

character was demonstrated through his character witnesses and through his years of 

service to his students, employers, and to the field of education. (Factual Findings 7-56.)

Assessment of Discipline 

29. 

In consideration of the evidence presented, the public, schoolchildren 

and the profession would be adequately protected by a more lenient discipline against 

respondent’s credentials than revocation. Respondent’s Clear Multiple Subject Teaching 

36 

Credential and reading credential will be suspended for one year, with the suspension 

stayed until and if ever respondent renews either credential at which time respondent 

must immediately serve the one-year suspension. Any and all other credentials, 

certificates, and authorizations issued to respondent are revoked. (Factual Findings 1-

56.)

ORDER 

The Clear Multiple Subject Teaching Credential issued by the Commission to 

respondent is suspended for one year, with the suspension stayed until and if ever 

respondent renews the credential at which time respondent must immediately serve 

the one-year suspension. 

The Clear Specialist Instruction Credential (Reading) issued by the Commission 

to respondent is suspended for one year, with the suspension stayed until and if ever 

Respondent renews the credential at which time respondent must immediately serve 

the one-year suspension. 

Any and all other credentials, certificates, and authorizations issued to 

respondent David Lee Sandles are revoked.

DATE:

CHANTAL M. SAMPOGNA

Administrative Law Judge

Office of Administrative Hearings

37 

