BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Accusation Against: 

STACY W. MCCAY, Respondent 

Case No. 2-111057592 

OAH No. 2022060279 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Mary Agnes Matyszewski, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative 

Hearings, State of California, heard this matter by videoconference and telephone on 

October 11, 2022.

Lauro A. Paredes, Deputy Attorney General, State of California represented 

complainant Mary Vixie Sandy, Ed.D., Executive Director of the Commission on Teacher 

Credentialing, State of California (the Commission).

Stacy W. McCay, respondent, represented herself.

Oral and documentary evidence was received. The record was closed and the 

matter was submitted for decision on October 11, 2022.

FACTUAL FINDINGS

Respondent’s Credential History 

1.

The Commission is responsible for credentialing public school teachers in 

California, including disciplining the holders of such credentials.

2. 

On August 1, 2000, the Commission issued a Clear Multiple Subject 

Teaching Credential (credential) to respondent. The credential authorizes respondent 

to teach all subjects in a self-contained class, as a self-contained classroom teacher, to 

team teach or to regroup students across classrooms, in grades 12 and below, 

including preschool and in classes organized primarily for adults, to teach core classes 

consisting of two or more subjects the same group of students in grades five through 

eight, and to teach any of the core subjects to a single group of students in the same 

grade level as the core for less than 50 percent of the workday. The credential was in 

full force and effect at all times relevant to the allegations set forth in the accusation 

and will expire on September 1, 2025, unless renewed.1 

Accusation  

3. 

On May 2, 2022, complainant signed the accusation in her official 

capacity alleging four causes for discipline as grounds to take an adverse action 

1 Respondent previously held a Multiple Subject Teaching Permit that was 

issued on August 30, 1999, and expired on September 1, 2000. Respondent also held a 

30-day substitute teaching permit that was initially issued on March 11, 1996, and was 

continually renewed until April 1, 2000. 

2

 
against respondent’s credential. Complainant alleged that respondent engaged in

unprofessional conduct, immoral conduct, acts involving moral turpitude, and 

demonstrated evident unfitness for service. The causes for discipline were based on 

complainant’s allegations that respondent filed a false claim for injury with her 

employing school district and had an unapproved absence. 

Complainant alleged four aggravating factors that demonstrated a greater 

degree of adverse action was warranted. Those aggravating factors were: (1) 

respondent’s misconduct evidenced multiple acts of wrongdoing and/or demonstrated 

a pattern of misconduct; (2) respondent was warned by her district to conduct herself 

in a professional and honest manner at all times; (3) respondent’s misconduct was 

surrounded by or followed by bad faith, dishonesty or other violation of the laws 

governing educators; and (4) respondent’s misconduct significantly harmed a child 

entrusted to the care of a credential holder or applicant, significantly harmed the 

public or the educational system. 

4. 

Respondent timely filed a notice of defense and this hearing was set. 

Trial Stipulation 

5. 

On August 31, 2022, complainant and respondent executed a “Trial 

Stipulation.” In that document respondent stipulated and agreed to the facts and 

aggravating factors set forth in the accusation, acknowledged her legal rights, and 

“knowingly, intelligently, freely and voluntarily admits the complete truth and accuracy 

of each and every charge contained in [the accusation].” Respondent further admitted 

her credential was subject to discipline for the violations described in the accusation. 

As a result of that stipulation, respondent admitted the following facts:

3

At all times relevant herein, respondent was employed by the Buena Park 

School District (District) as a certificated employee and assigned to work as 

an elementary teacher at Gordon H. Beatty Elementary School located in 

Buena Park, California.

  Respondent was dismissed from her employment at that District on or about 

February 20, 2020, for the reasons discussed below. 

  On the morning of October 22, 2018, respondent reported to her school 

secretary and Principal that she had sustained an injury on a rubber mat as 

she was walking to the office. It was established that respondent was 

dishonest in filling her October 22, 2018, injury report and in her statements 

to investigators.

Upon notification, school staff followed the standard procedure and asked 

respondent if she needed to see the doctor and also requested a statement. 

Respondent initially refused but later that day agreed to go to Concentra, 

the hospital used by the District for work place injuries.

  Respondent was treated at Concentra, then filed a Workers’ Compensation 

Claim with the District’s compensation plan. An investigation into the claim 

was begun and respondent was interviewed by an investigator.

  As part of the investigation, respondent was interviewed on November 15, 

2018. Respondent’s statement was recorded with her permission and 

subsequently transcribed. During the interview, respondent reported that 

her injury occurred early in the morning at approximately 7:30 a.m., on 

October 22, 2018. Respondent volunteered that she was wearing “Nike flex 

runs 2013's.'' Respondent stated that her injury occurred while using a cane 

4

for support. According to respondent, after passing the first doorway to her 

classroom, she put the cane on the border of the mat in front of the second 

doorway. Respondent then went to put weight on her cane. The mat border 

slipped out from underneath her, jerking her body in a way that caused her 

injury. Respondent took a picture of the mat before reporting her injury.

  After reviewing video footage of the incident, the investigator concluded 

that everything in respondent’s statement was false, from the shoes she was 

wearing to the injury she claimed to have received. 

  At approximately 7:11 a.m., respondent is shown in the video in sandals and 

using a cane. Respondent is seen approaching the door that is farther away 

from the camera and walking smoothly onto the mat in front of the door 

(first mat). Respondent then lifts her cane up as she reaches into her pocket 

to retrieve her cellular phone. Holding her phone in one hand, Respondent 

steps briefly on the second mat. Respondent’s cane is elevated and never 

touches the second mat.

  At approximately 7:23 a.m., respondent is again seen stepping on to the 

second mat. Respondent then pauses, looks down and is seen separating the 

rubber border from the second mat, with her left foot and then further 

separating it with her right foot. Respondent then walks away. A few 

moments later, respondent returns to the area of the second mat. She stops 

in front of the second mat and turns away from the camera. Grabbing her 

cellular phone, she turns back towards the camera and appears to take 

multiple pictures of the second mat and then walks off camera. 

5

On or about July 21, 2016, respondent informed the new principal at Beatty 

Elementary that she would be attending the Olympics in Brazil, and therefore 

would not be available to report to work until August 22, 2016. The Principal 

notified respondent that her leave needed to be approved by the District 

office. 

  The new principal consulted the District office and found that respondent 

did not have approval to miss school time to attend the Olympics. The 

principal contacted respondent by phone on July 25, 2016, and informed her 

that she did not have approval to go on the trip during student instructional 

time. The principal documented the conversation in a letter and emailed 

respondent a copy of the letter. 

  On or about July 28, 2016, respondent responded in writing to the 

principal’s letter. Respondent claims that she had been planning to go to the 

Olympics in Rio de Janeiro for four years. Respondent claims that all her 

immediate supervisors had been aware of her plans to attend the Olympics 

and that no one had informed her that she would need to get written 

approval for the trip. Respondent further states that she had always 

understood the change in the school calendar would not affect her plans 

and that she had made many nonrefundable purchases based on that belief. 

Respondent asserted that she strongly believed that her absence should be 

approved based on the decision by the district to honor travel plans made 

before the change of the instructional calendar. 

  The principal replied to respondent in writing on July 29, 2016. The principal 

advised respondent that prior notice to administrators did not constitute 

written approval. The principal also noted that, as respondent's trip to Rio de 

6

Janeiro was recreational in nature, it could not be approved as personal 

necessity or sick leave according to her bargaining unit contract language. 

The principal recommended respondent submit a request for unpaid leave 

of absence to the Governing Board if she intended on moving forward with 

the trip. 

  On August 1, 2016, the District received a letter from respondent addressed 

to the Director of Human Resources. In the letter, respondent claims that she 

had made plans to go to the Olympics when the school calendar changed 

and that the teachers had been told during a staff meeting that they could 

use their personal necessity days for vacations that had been previously 

approved. Respondent requested that the district honor what she 

considered her approved leave. 

  The District did not approve Respondent’s absence. Respondent went on her 

trip to Brazil and missed the first two weeks of the school year.

  On September 22, 2016, the District issued a Notice of Unprofessional 

Conduct based on Respondent’s unauthorized two-week trip to Brazil. The 

investigation that led to the Notice of Unprofessional Conduct found that 

Respondent’s behavior was unprofessional and dishonest. Respondent was 

further ordered to (1) comply with all directives given to her by her 

supervisors; (2) comply with all applicable rules and procedures when 

requesting leave; and (3) conduct herself in a professional and honest 

manner at all times. 

7

Respondent’s Documents

6.

Respondent submitted several letters from colleagues, supervisors, family 

and friends, and medical providers attesting to her work ethic, professionalism, 

community involvement, good character and/or medical treatment. Those letters were 

received as administrative hearsay pursuant to Government Code section 11513, 

subdivision (d), and are summarized below. 

LETTERS FROM COLLEAGUES AND FOUNDATION PRESIDENT 

7. 

Mindi Whitely, a middle school teacher in the Buena Park district, wrote a 

letter June 2022 stating that respondent began her teaching career at Beatty 

Elementary School in 1999 when Ms. Whitely was a second year teacher. Over the 

many years they taught together, Ms. Whitely “had the pleasure of watching 

[respondent] interact with her class and other children.” Respondent was the Student 

Council advisor and activity person for many years and “went above and beyond what 

is expected of a fourth grade teacher to provide an engaging environment for our 

students.” Ms. Whitely wrote further:

Outside the classroom, [respondent] was also one of the 

leaders in technology. She was a tech lead for several years 

and is able to use Office and Google docs. She has stayed 

up to date with the use of technology with her substitute 

position in three separate districts that use different 

programs.

I would personally recommend [respondent] for a teaching 

position. Any school would benefit from her experience, 

honesty, and eagerness to learn. It is my opinion that 

8

[respondent] should be allowed to continue teaching and 

not lose her teaching credential. 

Respondent testified that Ms. Whitley is aware of the District proceeding.

8. 

Lynn Sipes, a Buena Park School District employee who teaches at 

Pendleton Elementary School, authored a letter June 2022 “To whom it may concern.” 

Ms. Sipes wrote: “I highly recommend that [respondent] be allowed to continue 

teaching. Before we started teaching together some 20 years ago, we were substitute 

teachers together.” Ms. Sipes wrote further: 

[Respondent’s] 20 years of experience in the classroom has 

shown her ability to be effective with students. I know how 

much she loved being a substitute teacher all those years 

ago. We’ve also had the opportunity to discuss how much 

she has enjoyed substitute teaching recently. Even during 

some of the worst times for teachers, [respondent] has been 

positive when discussing the obstacles we have faced 

during the Covid 19 pandemic. 

During our 20 years of teaching together we were never 

lucky enough to be at the same school; however, we were in 

the same grade level and often met at grade level 

collaborations and trainings. [Respondent] was always well-

informed on many topics that we had to discuss or learn 

about. She was always prepared and asked intelligent 

questions. 

9

9.

Alice Burnett, Founding President, of Buena Park School District’s 

Foundation, a fundraising organization, past chair of the American Cancer Society 

Relay for Life, and City of Buena Park Human Resources Manager, wrote an undated 

letter addressed “To whom it may concern.” She wrote that as a volunteer and past 

event chair for the American Cancer Society’s local Relay for Life event, she has worked 

with respondent for several years. She described respondent as “always passionate and 

available to help in any way.” Respondent “has captained teams, fundraised at Beatty 

Elementary School with the Student Council, and has been on the committee for this 

event many times. She is also at nearly every community event in Buena Park. Since I 

work for the city, I always look forward to seeing her at events” which she listed. Ms. 

Burnett has also “gotten to know [respondent] personally. She is honest, caring, and a 

lot of fun. Many of the student volunteers would gravitate toward [respondent]” like 

Ms. Burnett’s son does, because respondent “just knew how to make volunteering 

fun.” Ms. Burnett wrote further: 

I remember her final years working at Beatty School. Those 

were very difficult years for her and I could tell that the pain 

of her injury and the stress of her Workers’ Compensation 

case greatly affected her. As I am the Human Resources 

Manager at the City of Buena Park, she had asked for advice 

on navigating California’s Workers’ Compensation system. 

Knowing the difficulty she had, I was shocked and 

disappointed at the outcome of her case and employment 

at the district. 

Personally, I have seen how much more she is enjoying her 

life now. It is always a pleasure to be around [respondent] 

10 

as she is an upbeat and outgoing person. Even through the 

pandemic, she continued to show community support to 

events [

], even in our limited and virtual capacities. She 

has shown as a volunteer and community member she is an 

asset. I believe she is also an asset to the schools she has 

been working for these last several years. Teachers that [

] 

love their profession and the students they serve are greatly 

needed and [respondent] has more than proven her value. 

Please allow her to continue helping the students in our 

community. 

Respondent worked with Ms. Burnett at the District. 

10. 

Jennifer Turner, a science teacher in the Los Angeles Unified School 

District, authored a letter to the commission on June 2, 2022. She wrote that “it is too 

late to overturn what the Buena Park School District did to [respondent], but it is not 

too late to make sure when I say that she should not lose her teaching credential.” Ms. 

Turner wrote that respondent’s “last few years at the Buena Park School District, and 

specifically Beatty Elementary School were very hard and extremely stressful. In 2013 

her back was broken when she sat in a broken chair, that was supposed to be removed 

from the room because it was broken, and it collapsed under her.” Ms. Turner wrote 

further: 

As a result of this she needed to have surgery and was in a 

nursing home for 10 days. I visited her in that nursing home 

and she didn’t know if she was ever going to be able to 

walk again. Surgery was moderately successful and she was 

able to walk again. She didn’t recover from the emotional, 

11 

physical, and social distress while continuing to work at 

Beatty Elementary School. What [respondent] was like 

before she broke her back at Beatty Elementary School and 

what she was like after were two different people. 

Since [respondent] has left Beatty Elementary School, and 

after her termination hearing, she has changed again for 

the better. She is a happier person, she has lost a lot of 

weight, is healthier, and enjoys teaching and being around 

students more. Yes, I understand that I am not a doctor, but 

I have known [respondent] for over 12 years and the 

changes due to her injury, the stress of working for the 

Buena Park School District after they did not support her 

through recovery, and the change after she left district were 

transformative. [Respondent] is an excellent teacher and I 

do believe it would be beneficial for her to continue 

working with students. She has dedicated her life to 

teaching and does a wonderful job. 

11. 

Gail A. Kairis, Administrator of Instructional Programs, North Orange 

County ROP, wrote a letter June 21, 2022, addressed “To whom it may concern.” She 

was thankful for “the opportunity to recommend” respondent. Ms. Kairis wrote that 

respondent joined North Orange County ROP as a substitute teacher in August 2021 

and “took on one of the most difficult assignments in the substitute teaching arena. It 

was a long-term position, outside her area of expertise in Automotive.” Ms. Kairis 

wrote further: 

12 

[Respondent] took initiative, was resourceful and 

committed. She worked with the students on Employability 

skills, teaching them how to apply for a job and the skills 

needed to work well with others such that they would be 

able to keep their job. She also created engaging, table-top 

activities related to the automotive industry in an effort to 

keep the students interested in the pathway. 

To say that classroom management was a challenge with 

this assignment is an understatement. [Respondent] was 

exceptional with the students. She was professional 

regardless of what came her way and remained in the 

assignment until the teacher returned a couple of months 

into the year. 

The skills [respondent] exhibited in this assignment and the 

others following, demonstrate her ability to take on any 

task, to do whatever it takes to complete it and to maintain 

professionalism at all times. These are rare and valuable 

qualities today. I both appreciate and highly recommend 

[respondent]. Please feel free to call me if you have any 

further questions [and she provided her contact 

information]. 

Respondent testified that the auto shop program she taught there had no 

lesson plans and no teacher before she arrived. Ms. Kairis is aware of the District 

proceeding against respondent and her termination. 

13 

12.

Taylor Swaney, North Orange County ROP, Medical Careers and Sports 

Medicine, wrote a letter to the commission on June 13, 2022. She noted that 

respondent was her long term substitute during the 2021-2022 school year while Ms. 

Swaney was on maternity leave for several months. Ms. Swaney noted that it “was a 

great concern of mine to leave my class with a substitute for so long, but I was glad to 

have [respondent] cover during my time away. To my knowledge, students continued 

with their rigorous curriculum, were taught in a safe environment, and were treated 

with respect and positivity.” Ms. Swaney noted: 

A great deal was required of [respondent] to come in mid-

year to a hands-on class environment. Coming into the 

class mid-year required [respondent] to acquire classroom 

management quickly, establish daily policy and procedures 

as a new instructor, and learn to teach curriculum for two 

medical classes. [Respondent] was also required to adapt 

the course grading policies and submit semester grades 

and course certifications through an online learning 

management system. [Respondent] was able to complete 

these tasks, and most importantly, students were still able 

to learn the curriculum in both my Medical Careers and 

Sports Medicine classes. 

Though I only met [respondent] briefly in person, I believe 

because of her willingness to take on this long term 

substitute position, my students were able to continue 

learning and I am sincerely grateful. I feel that [respondent] 

14 

is an asset to North Orange County ROP in the teaching 

profession. 

Respondent testified about knowing more than she thought in this field. 

Respondent is not sure if Ms. Swaney is aware of the District proceeding. 

13. 

Anthony Abney, Principal at Maple Elementary School, authored a “letter 

of recommendation” on May 6, 2021, addressed “To Whom It May Concern.” Mr. 

Abney wrote that respondent has been serving as a long-term substitute at his school 

for the past three months. Respondent “has been supporting one of my fourth-grade 

teachers for most of her tenure at Maple. She has been very flexible when requested 

to cover other duties and has also tutored several students after school.” Mr. Abney 

wrote that “Maple is a high need school, and many of our students in the class she 

supports need specialized instruction and accommodations in order to succeed. 

[Respondent] has worked with the teacher to provide those students with strategies 

and skills to be successful, both academically and behaviorally.” Mr. Abney stated that 

he has not observed respondent teach but “can say she is a flexible and dependable 

substitute teacher. She has also attended professional developments on reading 

workshop and culturally responsive teaching practices.” Mr. Abney requested that he 

be contacted for any additional information or clarification.

Respondent testified that she began working at Maple Elementary School after 

being terminated. Quote Mr. Abney does not know about the District proceeding. 

14. 

Seana Brief, Educator, Cypress High School, Law and Justice Signature 

Academy, Legal Practices Career Pathway, authored a letter May 25, 2022, addressed 

to “Representative of the Court.” Ms. Brief has been “working closely” with respondent 

“for the past six months” and has “seen her respond with dignity and grace to her 

15 

students in the best of times and the worst of times. This year has been extremely 

stressful, both for students and teachers, and we have faced many mutual challenges 

because of the pandemic.” Ms. Brief wrote further: 

In all of these situations, [respondent] has been honest, 

professional, caring, and sensitive to her student’s needs. 

She stepped into an emergency teaching situation and I 

could always trust her to do the right thing for everyone 

involved. With 20 years of teaching experience, 

[respondent] always knew what to do, even if there were no 

official instructions. She is a true educational professional. 

Thank you for taking the time to read this letter and 

contemplate [respondent’s] situation. I feel that she should 

be able to keep teaching and doing what she does so 

well  .  .  . help students succeed. Please feel free to contact 

me further if you would like more information. I look 

forward to the court resolving this matter in [respondent’s] 

favor, for the sake of justice. 

15. 

Patrick Salem, North Orange County ROP, Engineering Technologies, 

Sunny Hills High School, wrote a letter August 19, 2022, addressed “To Whom It May 

Concern.” Mr. Salem wrote: 

Thank you the opportunity to recognize [respondent] for 

her excellent work. [Respondent] was asked to help me in 

the beginning of the year with my transition from the 

workforce to teaching high school students. It was helpful 

16 

to have such an experienced teacher in the class with me to 

give me tips for classroom management. Her tips were 

helpful but never heavy-handed. Her insights into high 

school demonstrated that she has been effective in the 

classroom.

[Respondent] also talked about how much she has enjoyed 

teaching over these last few years. It has been a pleasure to 

be in the classroom with [respondent] and I would 

recommend her for any teaching position. I hope she will be 

able to teach for many years in the future. 

Respondent testified that the ROP has several principals, and they appreciate 

her experience and have asked her “to do lots.” There is a new teacher at the ROP, and 

as ROP teachers “do not go through teaching school,” they teach based on their fields 

of experience, she worked with the new teacher in the classroom, showing him how to 

teach. 

16. 

Seven Special Education Paraprofessionals at A. E. Arnold Elementary 

School in Cypress signed a letter on respondent’s behalf. They wrote that when they 

“heard [respondent] may not be able to substitute teach anymore [they] were 

disheartened” and “wanted to help her in any way [they] could because she has been 

wonderful with [their] students.” They ”have had the opportunity to be in classes with” 

respondent and she “is kind, patient, and caring with” students. They wrote: “Change is 

very hard on our students, but she makes our students feel comfortable, When the 

teachers have to miss class, we are always happy to see that [respondent] is the sub.” 

They concluded: “We would like to recommend that [respondent] is allowed to 

continue teaching.” 

17 

Respondent testified that Cypress special education is clustered altogether and 

they have four or five aides in each classroom. Respondent substituted “in their pod a 

lot” and the aides are shy and did not want to write individual letters, “even though 

they appreciate my hard work,” so they wrote this group letter. 

PERFORMANCE EVALUATIONS FROM BUENA PARK SCHOOL DISTRICT

17. 

A District Teacher Evaluation Form for the 2016-2017 school year, when 

respondent taught fourth grade at Beatty Elementary School, documented that 

respondent “meets standards” in all areas and there were no areas that “needed 

growth.” The six standards rated were Engaging and Supporting All Students in 

Learning, Creating and Maintaining Effective Environments for Student Learning, 

Understanding and Organizing Subject Matter for Student Learning, Planning 

Instruction and Designing Learning Experiences for All Students, Assessing Student 

Learning, and Developing as a Professional Educator. In the comments section 

respondent’s evaluator, who was her school principal, wrote: 

[Respondent] meets the expectations and goals of 

professional standards of teaching. Her instructional 

program and lesson delivery is designed to maximize 

learning opportunities for students to meet grade level 

standards.

[Respondent] will strive to incorporate the Standards-Based 

Practices in her daily lessons to support high level of rigor 

for all students. She will continue to apply practices in her 

classroom to create and maintain an effective and 

collaborative environment for student learning. She will 

18 

plan instruction and use strategies to meet the needs of all 

students.  

[Respondent] will continue to spend time collaborating with 

her colleagues to develop new ideas for lessons that will 

actively engage her students. She will continue to 

collaborate with her colleagues to support the planning and 

delivery of CCSS lessons (acronym not explained) using 

Eureka Math, Writing Workshop and our district’s 

curriculum guide. She will continue to work on effectively 

communicating with staff members. She will continue to 

develop as a professional educator by participating in 

district and site sponsored trainings. 

18. 

A District Teacher Evaluation Form for the 2015-2016 school year, when 

respondent taught fourth grade at Beatty Elementary School, documented that she 

“meets standards” in all six standards evaluated. In standard six, Developing as a 

Professional Educator, the category “works with families to improve professional 

practice” was marked as “an area of needed growth.” In the comments section 

respondent’s principal wrote: 

[Respondent] continually strives to meet the expectations 

and goals of the professional standards of teaching. Her 

instructional program and lesson delivery is designed to 

provide learning opportunities for all students to meet 

grade level standards. Classroom observations include 

evidence of curriculum planning integrated with technology 

to support lesson planning and student engagement. 

19 

[Respondent] works closely with her colleagues to develop 

activities to support students’ learning. She will continue to 

work on the development of project-based activities that go 

beyond traditional paper/pencil curriculum to help students 

problem solve and become critical thinkers.

[Respondent] will work on creating and maintaining an 

effective environment for student learning. She will 

continue to work to establish a climate that promotes 

fairness and respect so all students feel safe and secure. 

[Respondent] will continue to participate in district and site 

PDs [professional developments] to develop greater 

understanding and organization of subject matter for 

student learning. 

[Respondent] will continue to work with her colleagues to 

plan instruction and design learning experiences that meets 

[

] the needs of all students. Instruction will be modified 

to adjust for student needs.

[Respondent] will continue to work with her colleagues to 

develop formative assessment to help guide instruction to 

support student learning.

[Respondent] will participate in district PD to develop as a 

professional educator. She will work on supporting positive 

relationships with her student’s [

] parents. This includes 

keeping open lines of communication with parents to 

20 

ensure that classroom goals and expectations are clearly 

articulated and clarified when needed with parents request 

meetings and conferences.

[Respondent] has taken on the role of student Council 

advisor for many years and enjoys planning schoolwide 

activities to promote school spirit and family involvement. 

Her efforts to organize the various activities are appreciated 

by students, staff members and parents. 

19. 

A District Teacher Evaluation Form for the 2013-2014 school year, when 

respondent taught fourth grade at Beatty Elementary School, documented that she 

“meets standards” in all six standards evaluated. There were no areas of needed 

growth identified. In the comments section respondent’s principal wrote: 

[Respondent] continually strives to meet the expectations 

and goals of the professional standards of teaching. Her 

instructional program and lesson delivery is designed to 

provide learning opportunities for all students successfully 

meet grade level standards. Classroom observations include 

evidence of DII strategies (acronym not explained) that 

support lesson planning and student engagement. 

[Respondent] exhibits working knowledge of subject matter 

and student development. She demonstrates progress in 

implementing DII strategies into her instructional delivery 

and will continue to participate in the professional 

development opportunities to expand her level of comfort 

21 

and expertise in this area. I am recommending for her to 

continue seeking opportunities to strengthen her 

instructional delivery based on DII strategies and to create 

lessons that promote higher levels of student interaction, 

engagement and critical thinking. 

[Respondent] has taken on the role of student Council 

advisor for many years and enjoys planning schoolwide 

activities to promote school spirit and family involvement. 

Her efforts to organize the various activities are appreciated 

by students, staff members and parents. 

As our school transitions from CA State Standards to 

Common Core Standards, shifts in instructional practices 

will take place in lesson planning and instructional delivery. 

Future classroom observations will focus on how we instruct 

students to be critical thinkers and problem solvers to 

prepare for college and career readiness. 

She will continue to collaborate with her colleagues to 

review Common Core State Standards and plan CCSS 

lessons to support high level of rigor as defined by the 

Cognitive Rigor Matrix. 

20. 

A District Teacher Evaluation Form for the 2011-2012 school year, when 

respondent taught fourth grade at Gordon H. Beatty,2 documented that she “meets 

2 Presumably this is Beatty Elementary School.

22 

 
standards” in all six standards evaluated. There were no areas of needed growth 

identified. In the comments section respondent’s principal wrote: 

[Respondent] is completing her thirteenth year in the Buena 

Park School District as fourth grade teacher at Gordon H. 

Beatty School. [Respondent] continues to work closely with 

the fourth grade team oftentimes responsible for assisting 

the team in acquiring new computer skills and/or updating 

fourth grade data in the district’s data collection system. 

This year [respondent] has worked closely with her fourth 

grade colleagues to increase her skill level with the delivery 

of DII strategies specifically, the posting of ELA and Math 

standards, lesson objectives, student response in complete 

sentences, implementation of callbacks and classroom 

teams and student engagement. 

Additionally, [respondent] continues to be our Student 

Council Advisor. She is extremely adept at organizing and 

maintaining a high functioning Student Council 

organization that supports the needs of the students and 

school. 

Recommendations: Continue to work on increasing your 

skill level in the delivery of lesson structure and sequence as 

it relates the stages of the lesson, structured student 

interaction that includes preparation of predetermined 

questions throughout the lesson and student engagement. 

23 

LETTERS FROM RESPONDENT’S MEDICAL PROVIDERS

21.

Dr. Salvatore J. Plano, Jr., respondent’s chiropractor for over 20 years 

wrote that respondent “was a very active individual that [

] would come to me for 

chiropractic treatments when she was sore from her activities. Because she was so 

active in different sports and activities, I saw her often enough to get to know her 

chiropractic conditions and well-being.” Dr. Plano wrote further: 

In March 2013 [respondent] had a traumatic event that 

altered her body’s dynamics significantly. She had a 

laminectomy and discectomy to help reduce the lower 

extremity neuropathy and radicular symptoms that led her 

to experience residual side effects. [Respondent] went 

through a very traumatic event. While treating her between 

March 2013 and January 2020 her body and condition had 

worsened greatly. She was in constant pain that lead to 

flare ups to her lower extremities.

[Respondent] had difficulty moving and often had to use a 

cane and curtail all of her activities. Since January 2020, 

[respondent’s] back and other chiropractic symptoms have 

improved from time off. Even since returning to work in 

teaching, she has not decreased in improvements like she 

has previously when she worked for Buena Park. 

[Respondent] has been able to return to many of her former 

activities, obviously not all because she did sustain some 

long term residual effects. She has needed less chiropractic 

treatment and her pain levels have decreased. Stress is a 

24 

factor in many issues [respondent] had while she worked for 

Buena Park. Even though she still has the same job stress it 

is not a main factor in her chiropractic treatment any 

longer. 

22. 

Paul Rosandich, M.D., respondent’s board certified psychiatrist at Kaiser, 

wrote a letter on June 8, 2022, addressed “To Whom it May Concern.” Dr. Rosandich 

stated that respondent has been his patient since February 2020 and: 

in the intervening months she has been treated by me for 

what included psychologic issues. With her current 

treatment regimen I can report that she has shown 

significant improvement with regard to her overall mental 

health, and that symptoms have all but resolved. 

No other information regarding respondent psychologic issues was introduced. 

23. 

Elise Hsin-Ying Lee, M.D., respondent’s physician at Kaiser, authored a 

letter on September 3, 2019, “per patient request.” Dr. Lee wrote that the letter was “to 

state the conditions for which patient had been seen by myself in the physical 

medicine and rehabilitation clinic, once in 2018 and a second time in 2019.” Dr. Lee 

stated that respondent “suffers from chronic low back pain since an injury occurred on 

the job several years ago.” Dr. Lee also wrote: 

[Respondent] has mild gait disturbance and ankle weakness 

presumably due to the injury. She had undergone lumbar 

discectomy with lamiectomy [

] in 2013 with improvement 

but has residual neurological deficits. Symptoms remain 

25 

chronic to this date with intermittent worsening, which is in 

keeping with the nature of her chronic pain condition. 

LETTERS FROM VOLUNTEER ORGANIZATIONS 

24. 

Deborah Murray, director, Senior Program Manager, Union Bank, and 

Former Lead, Extra Mile Committee, San Diego MS Challenge Walk, National Multiple 

Sclerosis Society (NMSS), wrote a letter June 9, 2022, addressed “To whom it may 

concern.” Ms. Murray met respondent at Ms. Murray’s first San Diego MS Challenge 

Walk event nearly a decade ago where Ms. Murray served as both a walker and lead 

volunteer on the Extra Mile Committee for NMSS. Ms. Murray wrote:

From the first event we built a friendship founded on a 

mutual passion for devoting time to find a cure for this 

debilitating disease which had a personal impact on both 

our lives. [Respondent] contributes her creativity and 

energy not just during the event weekend, but also in the 

months leading to the event as an active volunteer 

contributing ideas around how to make each event unique, 

special, and impactful. 

In the years I have known [respondent], I have known her to 

be a compassionate and driven individual who often works 

through discomfort and pain to stay committed to many 

charitable organizations. Her effervescent smile is as 

infectious as it is endearing, and people gravitate to her 

positivity and genuine spirit. 

26 

Her love of teaching doesn’t stop at the classroom doors. 

On the Challenge Walk route (all 50 miles) [respondent] can 

be found throughout the weekend at various rest stops, 

passing out stickers, offering high-fives, ensuring loudly to 

encourage the walkers to reach not just the next mile, but 

their fullest potential. As someone who has walked the 

event, the treasured sticker from [respondent] is one of 

many high points of an otherwise grueling weekend.

For years I have seen [respondent] struggle through the 

physical limitations of her injuries at volunteer events. I’ve 

also seen her struggle through the mental anguish and 

consequential impacts of these injuries, notwithstanding the 

injustice of the workplace where she sustained her injuries 

actively working to drive her out of a profession that not 

only brought her joy, but that provided meaningful benefit 

for the youth of her community.

While the outcome of her case was not her favor, the silver 

lining is I have seen her spark renewed through being a 

substitute teacher. The oppression of the case is no longer 

weighing her down, and she is looking and feeling 

healthier, despite her permanent injuries. 

[Respondent] is an energizing, fearless, and compassionate 

friend and volunteer colleague who loves teaching. While 

the case with the district concluded with ending her full-

time employment, I implore the court to allow her to 

27 

maintain the ability to use her skills and talents in the 

classroom through substitute teaching. Kids thrive in 

environments where they have many diverse and engaged 

role models, removing [respondent’s] credential only serves 

to remove just such a role model.

Respondent testified that she continued to walk the event before she broke her 

back, now she volunteers at the event. She said that Ms. Murray knows about the 

Buena Park School District proceeding.

25. 

Kylie Rich, Manager, Walk MS and Emerging Events, National MS Society, 

sent a letter respondent thanking her for her “commitment to the National Multiple 

Sclerosis Society and being a long-time volunteer for organization.” Ms. Rich wrote 

further: 

Specifically with our Challenge Walk MS: Southern 

California event, we appreciate your volunteer efforts you’ve 

given to us for nearly 20 years. As you know, the Challenge 

Walk event weekend takes countless volunteers like you to 

help the event runs smoothly, and we are grateful to have 

you as part of our dedicated Crew team making it happen. 

Since the inaugural Challenge Walk MS: Southern California 

over 20 years ago, you have been an integral part of that 

Crew. Additionally, we would like to celebrate that you also 

were honored with the Nancy Bates Most Inspirational Crew 

Award in 2017, an award given to a top volunteer for this 

year.

28 

We appreciate your continued support as a volunteer and 

look forward to having you as part of our Challenge Walk 

MS Crew in 2022. 

26. 

Fred Smith, the former Mayor of Buena Park, former president Buena 

Park Noon Lions, and former Chair of Silverado Days, wrote a letter on June 3, 2022, 

addressed to the Office of the Attorney General. Mr. Smith wrote that he has had “the 

pleasure of knowing [respondent] since she was a child.” He has gotten to know her 

“very well” through “our families’ volunteer work in the community.” Respondent has 

volunteered and worked for the city of Buena Park since she was a child in such 

capacities as coaching youth sports, volunteering for the American Cancer Society 

Relay for Life, and Coordinating Council delivering Christmas food, presents and 

holiday cheer. He described her as a “pillar of the community.” Mr. Smith wrote:

I have gotten to know [respondent] best through her 

volunteer work for the Buena Park Noon Lions and 

especially our biggest charity community event Silverado 

Days, our city carnival. [Respondent] has worked tirelessly 

to assist the community. She has done every job she could 

from MCing the pie eating contest to manning the 

information booth. She can always be counted on to help 

out where needed. 

[Respondent] would be an asset to any workplace, but I 

know how much she enjoys teaching. It would be a loss to 

the school districts she is currently working in if she was 

unable to work for them.

29 

LETTER FROM U.S. CENSUS BUREAU SUPERINTENDENT

27.

Terry Little, Field Superintendent, U.S. Census Bureau, authored a letter 

on July 22, 2022, addressed “To Whom It May Concern.” In it she stated that 

respondent is a Field Representative with the U.S. Census Bureau, a position that 

requires a “federal background check.” Ms. Little wrote: “The job collects information 

that is protected by Title 13. You must take an oath to keep all collected data 

confidential. [Respondent] has shown that she can be trusted to keep the oath 

required by the US Federal Government.” Ms. Little noted further that respondent 

“completes her work within the timeframe expected and is always willing to take on 

more work if necessary. She has a respectful relationship with me and expeditiously 

completes her Census mandatory trainings. She is a pleasure to have on my team.”

LETTER FROM RESPONDENT’S FATHER 

28. 

Donald McCay, respondent’s father, wrote a letter stating how proud he 

is of his daughter. He wrote how respondent originally planned to follow in his 

footsteps and become a police officer, being a Police Explorer in high school, and 

attended the police academy after college graduation. However, she suffered an injury

to her patella tendon at the police academy when she fell while training. She then 

began substitute teaching for the Buena Park School District. Mr. McCay described 

respondent as “about the best person I know.” He wrote that her fall at Beatty 

Elementary School changed her life so much that he is “amazed she has stayed so 

good.” Her surgery was delayed due to a misdiagnosis, she was in intolerable pain, and 

while he cared for her she “could do nothing but scream in agony.” He described the 

district as caring little about respondent. His life experiences have taught him “much 

about Workers Comp and how it works.” He described his knee injury and how he 

dealt with the workers’ compensation system when he was Mayor of Buena Park. 

30 

During those times, the system “did everything that could be done, for the welfare of 

their injured employee.” His ”observation is that the Buena Park School District did as 

little as they could do.” He recounted how he picked respondent up from the 

emergency room after she blacked out and fell at school but the school did not call for 

an ambulance, instead a school employee revived respondent after the fall, and drove 

her to the hospital. Mr. McCay “always felt that the District fired [respondent] just 

because she was injured on the job and tried to have the District treat her properly 

afterwards. But through it all she has remained a positive, upbeat, friendly and a 

hardworking teacher. Now, after everything else the District has done, they want to 

take away her livelihood.3 Unconscionable. Don’t let them do it!” 

Respondent’s Testimony 

29. 

Respondent graduated from Savanah High School in Anaheim. She went 

to Cypress College and Cal State Fullerton, receiving her undergraduate degree in 

criminal justice. She received her master’s degree in cross-cultural teaching from 

National University. She began substitute teaching while working on her credential 

and began working full-time in the Buena Park School District after receiving her 

credential. She worked at that school district for approximately 23 years, where she 

taught fourth grade the entire time. She acknowledged that approximately 90 percent 

of the time she is the only adult alone in the classroom with students. She was also the 

student council advisor for approximately 10 years, a position where she raised funds, 

organized school dances, lunchtime games, planned special events, and worked with 

the parent fundraising group.

3 Mr. McCay seemed to mistakenly think the district was pursuing this action.

31 

 
Respondent testified how much better her life is since leaving the Buena Park 

School District. Even her friends and coworkers have noticed the difference. After her 

life had changed for the better, she realized she had “work to do on myself,” so she 

sought psychiatric treatment and she believes it has been very successful. She is 

happier and healthier since leaving Buena Park School District and is really enjoying 

her work. 

Currently respondent is substitute teaching for different school districts: 

Fullerton School District where she has done long term subbing and really enjoys 

working with special education students; Cypress School District; and North Orange 

County ROP, which offers high school classes that are skill oriented such as in the 

energy, medical and automotive fields. Respondent disclosed her termination from 

Buena Park School District to the Fullerton School District. She has had no discipline 

issues with any of the new school districts where she now works. She underwent 

thorough government background checks to work at those districts and was “cleared.” 

Respondent described how much she enjoys teaching and plans to continue 

working as a long-term substitute if her credential is not revoked as she has really 

enjoyed substitute teaching. She enjoys working with special education and high 

school students. Other districts pay more but she is “super happy” at the districts 

where she now works and would like to continue doing so. She is willing to have a 

probationary credential with terms and conditions. 

Respondent no longer uses a cane since leaving Buena Park School District and 

if her back hurts she does not substitute teach that day. She explained that given her 

back pain, she really should not have been teaching at Buena Park School District 

when the mat incident occurred. With her current schedule, she can remain at home 

on days she has back pain. 

32 

Respondent testified that she broke her back while working at Buena Park 

School District and it was one of her three workers’ compensation cases. In fact, she 

won all of those cases even though the district fought her on all of them. On one 

occasion she fell down, hit her head, and the principal picked her up and put her in the 

principal’s car, the school did not call an ambulance. She described her broken back 

incident as follows: in March 2013 she sat in a broken chair at work and ruptured her 

disc. She was treated through the workers’ compensation system, and spent two weeks 

in a nursing home. She could not move and underwent surgery, a discectomy and 

laminectomy, which improved her back somewhat, but never returned her to her pre-

injury condition. 

Respondent does not recall reporting the incident involving the rubber mats. 

She has been told that she reported it and she has been shown a document which she 

wrote and signed but she has no memory of doing so. She has been told many things 

about what happened that day, but has no recollection of them. However, she testified 

that she does not think she claimed that she fell. She has foot drop of approximately 

one-half inch as a result of her back injury with some neuropathy and decreased 

strength. She had to learn to walk normally again following her surgery. She has seen 

the video regarding the October 2018 fall and what she sees on that tape is that she 

slipped and jerked her body; she walked by the mats, this is all she saw on the video. 

She testified she may have been going back to look at the mat to see what caused her 

pain when she walked by the mat. She said it is not a great video and she does not 

know if she moved the mats or not. She is aware that the underlying Buena Park 

School District proceeding determined that she had falsified a report of injury. 

She explained that she is using a cane in the video and only did so when she 

was “in so much pain, is ridiculous how much pain I was in.” Since she is using a cane 

33 

in the video, she must’ve been in extraordinary pain that day. She should not have 

gone to work; now she does not go to work if she has pain. Whenever she was in pain 

she would get a “really angry,” her “adrenaline was going.” She was also on pain 

medications that she took at night, but does not recall if any of them were narcotics, 

they were pain medications and muscle relaxants. She explained that the pain that she 

was in the last few years at Buena Park School District affected her recollection of 

“many, many things,” and she does not know what medication she took the night 

before that incident, so does not know if the medication affected her memory. 

When asked about the interview of the incident that took place one month 

later, she recalled it being an “interrogation.” Respondent testified that at the 

underlying Buena Park School District hearing the investigator who interviewed 

respondent was upset that “they had changed her report” and testified about that 

during that hearing. Of note, no evidence corroborating or refuting that testimony was 

offered. Neither the decision in the underlying school district matter nor a transcript of 

the investigator’s testimony from that hearing were introduced in this hearing. 

Between her 2013 injury and the mat incident in 2018, respondent had another 

workers’ compensation claim. She denied being angry at the Buena Park School 

District for how those matters were handled. She is mad at the workers’ compensation 

carrier who kept denying her claims. She denied faking an injury to get back at the 

carrier. She stated that she did not go back to the physician the carrier recommended 

or follow-up on the recommendations or her claim at that time. She wanted nothing to 

do with the carrier. 

When asked if she understood the commission’s concerns regarding the 

allegations in the accusation, respondent replied, “I don’t know how to respond to 

that.” She did not find a claim of a false injury to be concerning. She said that if one 

34 

were to claim a false injury, she would need to look into that issue but it would not 

necessarily exclude the individual from employment. She could not answer when asked 

if she thought she had done anything wrong at Buena Park School District, stating that 

she could not recall the incident so could not answer the question. 

Respondent testified about the circumstances regarding her attendance at the 

2016 Olympics in Brazil. In the 2014-2015 school year, the District changed the school 

start date to be before Labor Day; it had always been after Labor Day for the 20 years

respondent worked at the district. She had already made plans to attend the Olympics 

in Brazil based on the old start date which was in existence when she purchased the 

tickets and had gotten permission to still attend from her principal at the time when 

the district announced the new start date. By the time of the Olympics, respondent 

had a new school principal who had no issues with respondent attending the Olympics 

but said she had to contact the HR department to determine the procedures. The 

principal then came back and “apologized profusely” to respondent saying that it was 

not her, but the district that was making her write letters stating respondent could not 

attend the Olympics. 

Respondent gleefully testified that she had tickets to an Olympic event every 

day, she got to go to so many events, and “is happy it is on the record.” She told her 

school that she was going to go to the Olympics and thinks she missed two weeks of 

school. She had lined up a substitute to cover her classroom and had all the day to day 

lesson plans lined out. Respondent was not paid for those days that she missed.

Respondent described her lengthy volunteer history. She has been volunteering 

at events since she was a young child. She passionately described volunteering for city 

and charity events. She has held various leadership positions as well as being the go to 

person to get things done for the events. She explained that her mother had multiple 

35 

sclerosis and died from it which led respondent to become actively involved in 

fundraising organizations aimed at treating that disease. 

Respondent testified in a direct and forthright manner. She answered all 

questions posed to her and was respectful of the proceedings. She made a very 

pleasant and credible witness. 

Closing Arguments 

30. 

Complainant argued this was an interesting case because respondent is 

clearly a good and excellent teacher but she attended the Olympics without approval 

and, most concerning, was her immoral conduct for faking an injury. Complainant 

noted that this case is a difficult one to decide. Complainant cited to the factors that 

must be considered, arguing that the issue is not whether respondent is a good 

teacher, as competency is not at issue; instead, the issue is trustworthiness. 

Complainant argued that what a teacher reports must be true, especially given that 

teachers are typically the only adult in the classroom, as was the case here. 

Complainant asserted that respondent’s testimony that she could not recall the events 

surrounding reporting an injury in 2018 was not credible, that she lied for money, and 

she has not taken responsibility for her actions. Complainant requested that 

respondent’s credential be revoked.

31.

Respondent argued that she did not fake an injury for financial gain. She 

could not recall the events of faking an injury and knows only that she wanted nothing 

more to do with the workers’ compensation carrier. Since leaving the district, her 

health has improved, she is seeing a psychiatrist, and she does not work if she has 

back pain. She is competent and is a different person than who she was when she 

worked at the Buena Park School District. She would like to continue teaching.

36 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS

Standard and Burden of Proof 

1.

Where an administrative proceeding involves the suspension or 

revocation of an existing license, the standard of proof is clear and convincing proof to 

a reasonable certainty. (

(1982) 135 

Cal.App.3d 853, 855-856.) “Clear and convincing evidence” requires a high probability 

of the existence of the disputed fact, greater than proof by a preponderance of the 

evidence. Evidence of a charge is clear and convincing as long as there is a high 

probability that the charge is true. (

(2001) 92 Cal.App.4th 654, 662.) 

2. 

In this proceeding, complainant has the burden of proving that cause 

exists to discipline respondent’s teaching credential.

Authority Authorizing Discipline 

3. 

Education Code section 44421 authorizes the Commission to privately 

admonish, publicly reprove, revoke or suspend the credential or certificate of one who 

has engaged in immoral or unprofessional conduct, persistently defied or refused to 

obey the laws regulating the duties of persons serving in the public school system, 

demonstrated evident unfitness for service or for any cause which would have 

warranted the denial of an application for, or a renewal of, a credential.

4.

Education Code section 44345 authorizes the Commission to deny an 

application for issuance of a credential if the applicant has committed an act involving 

moral turpitude. The denial shall be based upon reasons related to the applicant’s 

fitness to teach or fitness to perform other duties for which the applicant is 

37 

certificated, or competence to perform the duties which the credential authorizes the 

applicant to perform. 

5. 

California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80300, subdivision (a), 

authorizes the Commission to take “adverse action” against certificate holders which 

includes “a denial, a private admonition, public reproval, suspension or a revocation of 

one or more credentials.” Subdivision (b) defines an “aggravating factor” as an event 

or circumstance which demonstrates that a greater degree of adverse action for an act 

of professional misconduct is needed for public protection. Aggravating factors may 

include, but are not limited to, multiple acts of wrongdoing, bad faith or dishonesty, 

harm to children, the public, or the educational system. 

6. 

California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80302, states: 

(a) The Committee, in conducting its investigation, shall 

determine the relationship between the alleged misconduct 

and the applicant's or holder's fitness, competence, or 

ability to effectively perform the duties authorized by the 

credential. Such relationship may be based on facts which 

include, but are not limited to, the following: 

(1) The likelihood that the conduct may have adversely 

affected students, fellow teachers, or the educational 

community, and the degree of such adversity anticipated; 

(2) The proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct; 

(3) The type of credential held or applied for by the person 

involved; 

38 

(4) The extenuating or aggravating circumstances 

surrounding the conduct;

(5) The praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives 

resulting in the conduct; 

(6) The likelihood of the recurrence of the questioned 

conduct; 

(7) The extent to which disciplinary action may inflict an 

adverse impact or chilling effect upon the constitutional 

rights of the person involved, or other certified persons; 

(8) The publicity or notoriety given to the conduct.

(b) If the Committee finds no relationship between the 

alleged misconduct and the applicant's or holder's fitness, 

competence or ability to effectively perform the duties 

authorized by the credential the Committee shall close the 

investigation.

Application of the Morrison Criteria 

7. 

The criteria set forth in 

 (1969) 1 

Cal.3d 214, are embodied in California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80302. The 

factors include the extent to which the conduct has adversely affected students, fellow 

teachers, or the educational community and the degree of impact; the proximity or 

remoteness in time of the conduct; the type of certificate held; the extenuating or 

aggravating circumstances surrounding the conduct; the praiseworthiness or 

blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the conduct; the probability that the 

39 

questioned conduct will recur; the extent to which adverse action may have a chilling 

effect upon the constitutional rights of the person involved or on other certificated 

persons; and the publicity or notoriety given to the conduct. Those factors were 

reviewed and considered in this decision. 

Immoral or Unprofessional Conduct, Moral Turpitude

8. 

Terms such as immoral conduct, unprofessional conduct, and moral 

turpitude are so general that they must be given meaning in relation to the particular 

profession involved. Although a teacher may have committed an immoral act, unless it 

indicates his unfitness to teach, it is not an appropriate basis for his discharge. 

(

, p. 220.)

9. 

The determinative test of a charge of immoral or unprofessional conduct 

is fitness to teach, which is a question of ultimate fact. (

(1977) 10 Cal.3d 691.) 

10. 

There is broad discretion in determining what constitutes immoral 

conduct in the context of teacher disciplinary matters. (

(1999) 20 Cal.4th 327.) Immoral conduct has been defined by the 

courts as follows:

[T]hat which is hostile to the welfare of the general public 

and contrary to good morals. Immorality has not been 

confined to sexual matters, but includes conduct 

inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, 

indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; or as willful, flagrant, or 

shameless conduct showing moral indifference to the 

opinions of respectable members of the community, and as 

40 

 
an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public 

welfare. (

 (1970) 9 

Cal.App.3d 967, 972, citing 

, 179 Cal. App 2d 

808, 811.) 

11. 

The statutory definition of immoral conduct “must be considered in 

conjunction with the unique position of public-school teachers, upon whom are 

imposed ‘responsibilities and limitations on freedom of action which do not exist in 

regard to other callings.’” (

(2011) 194 Cal.App.4th 1454, 1466) [citation omitted].)

12.  Moral turpitude has been defined as an act that is contrary to honesty 

and good morals. (

(1991) 52 Cal.3d 968, 978; see also 

(1979) 98 

Cal.App.3d 167, 181 [moral turpitude is “any crime or misconduct committed without 

excuse or any dishonest or immoral act not necessarily a crime”].) 

Evident Unfitness for Service 

13.

“Evident unfitness for service” has been defined to mean clearly not fit or 

adapted to teach, ordinarily by reason of temperamental defects or inadequacies. 

“Unlike ‘unprofessional conduct,’ ‘evident unfitness for service’ connotes a fixed 

character trait, presumably not remediable merely on receipt of notice that one’s 

conduct fails to meet the expectations of the employing school district.” (

 (1992) 2 

Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444.) 

41 

Duties and Responsibilities of a Teacher

14.

“[R]esponsibilities and limitations on freedom of action which do not 

exist in regard to other callings” are imposed upon certain professions, “such as 

judges, policemen and schoolteachers. . . .”  (

 (1971) 

16 Cal.App.3d 820, 824.) 

15. 

A factor to consider is whether the teacher can serve as a role model for 

students. (

(2011) 194 Cal.App.4th 1454, 1465-1466.) 

16. 

The court of appeal in 

(1960) 179 

Cal.App.2 d 808, 812, citing 

(1924) 66 Cal. App. 157, 

168, explained:

[T]he calling of [a teacher] is so intimate, its duties so 

delicate, the things in which a teacher might prove 

unworthy or would fail are so numerous that they are 

incapable of enumeration in any legislative enactment. . . . 

His habits, his speech, his good name, his cleanliness, the 

wisdom and propriety of his unofficial utterances, his 

associations, all are involved. His ability to inspire children 

and to govern them, his power as a teacher, and the 

character for which he stands are matters of major concern 

in a teacher’s selection and retention. . . . A teacher in the 

public school system is regarded by the public and pupils in 

the light of an exemplar, whose words and actions are likely 

42 

to be followed by the students coming under his care and 

protection. 

Rehabilitation 

17.  Mere remorse does not demonstrate rehabilitation. A truer indication of 

rehabilitation is presented by sustained conduct over an extended period of time. (

(1995) 11 Cal.4th 975, 991.) The evidentiary significance of an applicant’s 

misconduct is greatly diminished by the passage of time and by the absence of similar, 

more recent misconduct. (

(1990) 50 Cal.3d 1061, 1070.) As Chief 

Justice Lucas observed, “The amount of evidence of rehabilitation required to justify 

admission varies according to the seriousness of the misconduct at issue.” (

, 

, at p. 1070.)

18. 

Rehabilitation commonly involves a substantial period of exemplary 

conduct following the misdeeds. (

(2000) 23 Cal.4th 1080, 1096.) 

Rehabilitation is a state of mind and the law looks with favor upon rewarding with the 

opportunity to serve, one who has achieved reformation and regeneration. (

 (1987) 43 Cal.3d 1041, 1058.)

Administrative Hearsay 

19. 

Government Code section 11513, subdivision (d), states: “Hearsay 

evidence may be used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining other evidence 

but over timely objection shall not be sufficient in itself to support a finding unless it 

would be admissible over objection in civil actions. An objection is timely if made 

before submission of the case or on reconsideration.” 

43 

Evaluation

20. While the stressors respondent reportedly experienced from feeling the 

District wrongly targeted her and opposed her workers’ compensation claims were 

certainly understandable, that did not explain her actions involving the mat incident on 

October 22, 2018, or during her interview on November 15, 2018. Although her pain 

level and/or medication use may have caused her to truly forget her actions on 

October 22, 2018, this did not explain the statements she made during her interview 

which occurred approximately one month later. More importantly, given the trial 

stipulation, all the facts alleged in the accusation are deemed true and conclusively 

established, and respondent’s testimony to the contrary at this hearing must be 

discounted. 

Respondent gleefully testified about attending the Olympics and expressed no 

remorse for any of her actions set forth in the accusation. Instead, she blamed the 

District. By all accounts she is now in favorable employment situations, but her 

testimony and the character reference letters begged the question of how she would 

behave if she were to find herself in an unfavorable employment situation. Given that 

she did not renounce her actions captured on video, her written statement, her 

interview, or her attendance at the Olympics, and seemed to dispute she did anything 

wrong, there is no assurance the conduct will not reoccur. 

Teachers must be counted on to accurately relay information, especially as they 

are often the only adult in the classroom. The facts here raised concerns about 

respondent’s ability to be trusted. Although her colleagues described her in glowing 

terms, her conduct in 2018 and failure to show any remorse for it were troubling. 

Based upon the evidence presented here, public protection requires the revocation of 

respondent’s credential. 

44 

Cause for Adverse Action

21.

Complainant established by clear and convincing evidence that cause 

exists to take adverse action against respondent’s credential pursuant to Education 

Code section 44421 because respondent engaged in unprofessional conduct when she 

submitted a false report of an injury and made false statements at an interview about 

that injury. 

22. 

Complainant established by clear and convincing evidence that cause 

exists to take adverse action against respondent’s credential pursuant to Education 

Code section 44421 because respondent engaged in unprofessional conduct when she 

took an unapproved trip to the Olympics. 

23. 

Complainant established by clear and convincing evidence that cause 

exists to take adverse action against respondent’s credential pursuant to Education 

Code section 44421 because respondent engaged in immoral conduct when she 

submitted a false report of an injury and made false statements at an interview about 

that injury. 

24. 

Complainant did not establish by clear and convincing evidence that 

cause exists to take adverse action against respondent’s credential pursuant to 

Education Code section 44421 because respondent did not engage in immoral 

conduct when she took an unapproved trip to the Olympics. 

25. 

Complainant established by clear and convincing evidence that cause 

exists to take adverse action against respondent’s credential pursuant to Education 

Code section 44421, as defined by Education Code section 44345, subdivision (e), 

because respondent engaged in acts of moral turpitude when she submitted a false 

report of an injury and made false statements at an interview about that injury.

45 

26.

Complainant did not establish by clear and convincing evidence that 

cause exists to take adverse action against respondent’s credential pursuant to 

Education Code section 44421, as defined by Education Code section 44345, 

subdivision (e), because respondent did not engage in acts of moral turpitude when 

she took an unapproved trip to the Olympics. 

27. 

Complainant established by clear and convincing evidence that cause 

exists to take adverse action against respondent’s credential pursuant to Education 

Code section 44421, because she is evidently unfit for service because she submitted a 

false report of an injury and made false statements at an interview about that injury. 

28. 

Complainant did not establish by clear and convincing evidence that 

cause exists to take adverse action against respondent’s credential pursuant to 

Education Code section 44421, because she is not evidently unfit for service because 

she took an unapproved trip to the Olympics. 

ORDER 

The Clear Multiple Subject Teaching Credential issued to Stacy W. McCay is 

revoked.

DATE: November 2, 2022 

MARY AGNES MATYSZEWSKI 

Administrative Law Judge

Office of Administrative Hearings

46 

