BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Accusation against: 

JEREMY LAMONT HENDERSON, Respondent 

Agency Case No. 2-21482734 

OAH No. 2022060457 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Debra D. Nye-Perkins, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative 

Hearings (OAH), State of California, heard this matter by videoconference and 

telephone on December 5 to 7, 2022. 

Desiree I. Kellogg, Deputy Attorney General, State of California, represented 

complainant, Mary Vixie Sandy, Ed.D., Executive Director of the Commission on 

Teacher Credentialing, State of California (the commission). 

Ellen N. Doty, Attorney at Law, Rothschild, Wishek & Sands, L.L.P., represented 

respondent, Jeremy Lamont Henderson, who was present throughout the hearing. 

Oral and documentary evidence was received. The record remained open to 

allow the parties to submit briefs related to respondent’s motion to dismiss this matter 

based upon the statute of limitations. The matter was closed and submitted for 

decision on December 20, 2022. 

PROTECTIVE AND SEALING ORDER 

The names of the victim and a minor child in this matter are subject to a 

protective and sealing order. No court reporter or transcription service shall transcribe 

the actual name of the victim or minor child but shall instead refer to them by their 

corresponding letters as set forth in the Confidential Witness List marked and received 

into evidence under seal as Exhibit 19. To protect privacy and confidential personal 

information from inappropriate disclosure, a written Protective Order Sealing 

Confidential Records was issued. The order lists the exhibits ordered sealed and 

governs the release of documents to the public. A reviewing court, parties to this 

matter, their attorneys, and a government agency decision maker or designee under 

Government Code section 11517 may review the documents subject to the order, 

provided that such documents are protected from release to the public. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Jurisdictional Matters 

1. 

The commission is responsible for the credentialing of public school 

teachers, including issuing credentials and taking adverse action against applicants 

and credential holders. An “adverse action” means the denial of an application for a 

credential, a private admonition, or public reproval of a credential holder, or the 

suspension or revocation of a credential. (Ed. Code, § 44000.5.) 

2. 

On January 9, 2017, the commission issued a Preliminary Education 

Specialist Instruction Credential to respondent; on July 31, 2017, the commission 

issued a Preliminary Single Subject Teaching Credential to respondent; on December 3, 

2 

2018, the commission issued a Clear Career Technical Education Teaching Credential 

to respondent (collectively hereinafter referred to as credentials). Documents received 

into evidence, show that the commission previously issued six different certifications to 

respondent, all of which have since expired. No evidence of any prior discipline of 

respondent’s credentials was provided. 

3. 

On July 2, 2021, the commission provided respondent with written notice 

that at its June 23-25, 2021, meeting, the Committee of Credentials (the committee), 

reconsidered and affirmed its finding of probable cause to recommend the revocation 

of respondent’s credentials. 

4. 

On February 15, 2022, Mary Vixie Sandy, ED.D., in her official capacity as 

Executive Officer of the commission, signed the accusation in this matter. The 

accusation contained three causes for discipline pursuant to Education Code section 

44421, alleging unprofessional conduct, immoral conduct, and unfitness for service; 

and, one cause for discipline pursuant to sections 44421 and 44345, subdivision (e), 

alleging respondent had committed acts involving moral turpitude. The accusation 

also alleged factors in aggravation, including: respondent’s misconduct was 

surrounded by or followed by bad faith, dishonesty or other violation of the law 

governing educators; and his misconduct significantly harmed a child trusted to his 

care and the pubic or educational system. 

5. 

Respondent timely filed a notice of defense, and this hearing followed. 

Respondent’s September 24, 2019, Conviction 

6. 

On September 24, 2019, in the Superior Court of California, County of 

San Diego, in Case No. SCD280826, respondent was convicted on his plea of guilty of 

violating Penal Code section 273.5, subdivision (a), corporal injury to a spouse and/or 

3 

roommate, a misdemeanor. As a result of this conviction, the court ordered 

respondent to successfully complete a domestic violence program and volunteer work, 

and sentencing was stayed for one year. Notably, on his plea form where respondent 

pled guilty to the charge, respondent admitted on September 24, 2019, as follows: 

I willfully and unlawfully inflicted a corporal injury resulting 

in a traumatic injury upon the mother of my child. 

The same plea form was thereafter signed by the Judge of the Superior Court on 

September 24, 2019, with the following “Finding and Order” (emphasis added): 

The Court, having questioned the defendant and 

defendant’s attorney concerning the defendant’s plea of 

Guilty/No Contest and admissions of the prior convictions 

and allegations, if any, finds that The defendant 

understands and voluntarily and intelligently waives his/her 

constitutional rights; the defendant’s plea and admissions 

are freely and voluntarily made; the defendant understands 

the nature of the charges and the consequences of the plea 

and admissions; and there is a factual basis for the same. 

The Court accepts the defendant’s plea and admissions, 

and the defendant is convicted thereby. 

After respondent successfully completed the domestic violence program and 

required volunteer work, the court dismissed the case in its entirety. 

7. 

The underlying circumstances of respondent’s conviction were obtained 

partially from San Diego Police Department reports received into evidence pursuant to 

Lake v. Reed (1997) 16 Cal.4th 448, 461-464, which held that portions of a law 

4 

enforcement officer’s report are admissible in an administrative proceeding over a 

hearsay objection. The underlying circumstances were also partially obtained from 

certified transcripts of testimony of witness and victim L.M. given under oath at the 

preliminary hearing in the Superior Court of California, County of San Diego, in Case 

No. SDC280826 and received in evidence. 

On February 26, 2019, officers from the San Diego Police Department (SDPD) 

responded to a domestic violence radio call at approximately 10:00 p.m. When they 

arrived on scene of the report, officers proceeded to interview the victim L.M., as well 

as the victim’s minor daughter J.M. The officers interviewed by L.M. and J.M., and L.M. 

and J.M. also provided testimony under oath regarding the events of that day. 

According to L.M., on that day she was driving J.M. to respondent’s condominium in 

order for J.M. to retrieve her purse and belongings from respondent’s condominium, 

where J.M. had stayed the weekend before. L.M. and respondent went to middle 

school and high school together and had been in a relationship for approximately 

three years, but they had ended the relationship approximately four years prior to 

February 26, 2019. L.M. informed the officer that J.M. was the daughter of respondent 

and L.M.,1 and after L.M. and respondent ended their relationship, respondent 

continued to co-parent J.M. with L.M. 

After they arrived at respondent’s condominium, J.M. knocked on his door but 

got no answer. Ultimately respondent opened the door and let J.M. enter the 

condominium but left the door a bit ajar and L.M. stuck her foot in the door to keep 

1 Evidence established that respondent is not the biological father of J.M., but 

that respondent acted as co-parent of J.M. with L.M. during the applicable time period. 

5 

 
respondent from closing the door. L.M. attempted to enter the condominium, and 

respondent pushed L.M. out of the door. L.M. pushed past respondent and entered his 

condominium. L.M. noticed an iPad belonging to respondent’s girlfriend and picked it 

up. According to L.M., respondent took the iPad out of her hands, grabbed her arm 

and hit her “in the head with an open hand” approximately 10 times. According to the 

statement L.M. gave to the officers, respondent “pulled the hood of [her] sweatshirt to 

drag [her] away, pushed [her] against the wall and strangled [her] with his left hand for 

five seconds.” According to L.M., when respondent pushed her against a wall, a framed 

photo fell off the wall and broke. During the preliminary hearing, L.M. testified that 

after respondent hit her, he “body slammed [her] to the couch” by “wrapp[ing] his 

arms around [her] thighs” and “thr[owing] [her] on to the couch.” According to the 

preliminary hearing testimony, L.M. stated that thereafter respondent grabbed her by 

the hood and “dragged [her] across the floor” towards the front door, and L.M. started 

kicking respondent. J.M. went to her bedroom to get her belongings, and thereafter 

J.M. exited the condominium with her belongings. The preliminary hearing transcript 

from J.M. shows that J.M. testified that when L.M. picked up the iPad, respondent 

tackled L.M. to the couch. J.M. also testified in the preliminary hearing that she saw 

respondent hitting L.M. and L.M. kicking and hitting respondent, and she saw 

respondent grab L.M. by the neck in the condominium and respondent was laying on 

top of L.M. with his hands around her neck. 

According to the preliminary hearing testimony, L.M. attempted to leave the 

condominium after J.M. but respondent stopped her in the living room, “held [her] 

against the wall and he strangled [her.]” In the preliminary hearing J.M. also testified 

that she saw respondent hold L.M. against a wall and strangle her, but stated this 

happened in the parking lot and not inside the condominium. Respondent let L.M. go 

and she exited the condominium, but respondent followed her. Thereafter, according 

6 

to L.M., respondent again put his hand around her chin/throat, pushed her against a 

metal staircase, and threatened L.M. that if she called the police, he would kill her. 

According to the police report, L.M. told officers that she tried to get into her vehicle, 

but respondent was preventing her from doing so, and was following her. L.M. 

instructed J.M. to get into the car and lock the doors. Respondent then took the car 

keys out of L.M.’s hand and got into L.M.’s vehicle in the driver’s seat. L.M. then walked 

away and respondent got out of the vehicle to follow her around, pushed her, hit her 

in the head again, and pushed her into a fence and strangled her again. At some point 

thereafter, respondent gave her the keys to her car, but stood in front of her car door 

and would not let her enter the car. Respondent then began to record the encounter 

on his phone. L.M. and respondent thereafter exchanged words while respondent 

recorded. Finally, L.M. was able to get into her car and drove out of the parking lot 

with J.M. 

Thereafter, approximately 10 minutes later, L.M. with J.M. in her vehicle returned 

to respondent’s condominium. The police report reflects that L.M. told the officers that 

she returned to respondent’s condominium because J.M. left her cell phone there. In 

the preliminary hearing transcript L.M. testified that she had called 911 after leaving 

respondent’s condominium, and L.M. asked the 911 dispatcher if she needed to drive 

back to respondent’s condominium where the incident happened. According to L.M. 

the 911 dispatcher told her she could drive back if she was comfortable, or the police 

could call her when they arrived at that scene, and she could go there afterwards. 

According to the preliminary hearing transcript, L.M. learned that J.M. left her cell 

phone at respondent’s condominium only after speaking to the 911 dispatcher. 

Regardless as to the reason why, L.M. drove back to respondent’s condominium. When 

L.M. arrived at the parking lot of respondent’s condominium she saw respondent and 

his then girlfriend, now fiancée Chalin James, having a “heated discussion.” 

7 

Respondent stopped her car and J.M. jumped out to get her cell phone. L.M. got out 

of the car to follow J.M. Thereafter, respondent told Ms. James to hit L.M., and 

Ms. James punched L.M. on her head. Thereafter, Ms. James and respondent went 

inside respondent’s condominium, and L.M. and J.M. went to L.M.’s car and L.M. called 

911 again. L.M. waited in her car for police to arrive and during that time she saw 

respondent walk to his car, load “15 to 20 guns/rifles into the back of his vehicle” and 

drive away. L.M. waited for police to arrive for three to four hours and nobody showed 

up. L.M. called 911 again and the 911 dispatcher told her that there had been a “big 

incident” and officers were not available and if she wanted to go home an officer 

would meet her there. L.M. testified at the preliminary hearing that police officers 

arrived at her home at about 10:00 p.m. 

8. 

SDPD officers also took photographs of L.M.’s injuries, which officers 

observed as being redness on the front and side of L.M.’s neck, a swollen left wrist, a 

mark on her left cheek, and a bruise on her right shin. 

Commission’s Witnesses 

9. 

The commission provided the testimony of three witnesses at the 

hearing, as well as documents received in evidence. Two of the commission’s witnesses 

are detectives with SDPD, namely Bernadette Yee and Marisela Cooper. The third 

witness is a Special Investigator for the commission named Judith Arce. The following 

factual findings are based on their testimony and supporting documents received in 

evidence. 

TESTIMONY OF BERNADETTE YEE 

10.  Detective Bernadette Yee graduated the police academy in 2009 and has 

served as a sworn peace officer for SDPD since that time. She was a patrol officer from 

8 

2009 to 2017, and she has been a detective since 2017. Detective Yee is currently 

assigned to the internal affairs unit of SDPD, and prior to that she was a detective in 

the domestic violence unit for two-and-a-half years where her duties included 

investigation of domestic partner crimes of violence. She investigated over 500 cases 

while assigned to the domestic violence unit. Detective Yee has undergone extensive 

training in the police academy, as well as on the job as an investigator in the execution 

of warrants and the preservation of evidence. On February 27, 2019, Detective Yee was 

assigned to investigate domestic violence allegations against respondent. 

11. 

As part of her investigation of respondent, Detective Yee reviewed the 

SDPD police report of February 26, 2019, as well as police officer body worn camera 

footage. Detective Yee interviewed L.M. and obtained a Domestic Assault Forensic 

Investigation (DAFI) examination of L.M., which was conducted. Detective Yee testified 

that the DAFI examination revealed that L.M. suffered injuries with bruising, scratches, 

and change in her voice. Detective Yee stated that she believed L.M. to be credible in 

the account of the events of February 26, 2019. Detective Yee conducted a “records 

search” of respondent and L.M. and discovered there were no prior reported domestic 

violence incidents, but that respondent had “prior firearms reports” that were notable 

because they indicated that respondent had “a large number of firearms.” Detective 

Yee concluded there was probable cause to arrest respondent for domestic violence. 

Detective Yee, along with another detective, Marisela Cooper, and other officers from 

SDPD, arrested respondent on February 28, 2019, at Pacific Beach Middle School. She 

stated that respondent was arrested at the school because SDPD knew he had 

firearms, and the school was “a sterile environment” with less access to firearms. At the 

time of respondent’s arrest, Detective Yee gave respondent an opportunity to speak 

about the domestic violence incident of February 26, 2019, but respondent refused. 

She also told respondent that he needed to turn over whatever firearms he had in his 

9 

possession to the arresting officer from SDPD, but respondent refused to give consent 

to hand over firearms and refused to give consent to search his vehicle, which was 

parked on the Pacific Beach Middle School campus. However, the school’s principal 

gave verbal consent to SDPD to conduct an administrative search of respondent’s 

vehicle. SDPD located respondent’s vehicle parked in the school parking lot open to 

the public and confirmed the vehicle was registered to respondent. 

Detective Yee, Detective Cooper and SDPD officers observed as the San Diego 

Unified School District (SDUSD) campus officers searched respondent’s vehicle. The 

SDUSD officers found a locked snap safe case in the glove compartment and a gun 

holster under the front passenger seat of respondent’s vehicle. Detective Yee 

explained that a snap safe case is a lock box typically used to store firearms. Detective 

Yee picked up the snap safe box and it was heavy and consistent with the weight of a 

snap safe box with a firearm inside based on her experience and training. The SDUSD 

officers left the snap safe box in respondent’s vehicle and Detective Yee photographed 

the SDUSD officer’s search of the vehicle. 

After SDUSD officers searched the vehicle, Detective Yee and Detective Cooper 

secured and locked the vehicle and arranged for the vehicle to be towed to the police 

station. Detective Yee and Detective Cooper both followed the tow truck driver to the 

police station and locked the vehicle in a secured evidence cage where the vehicle was 

thereafter stored. Detective Yee explained that the evidence cage is a secure area with 

limited access, and only the Detectives and Watch Commander would have access to 

the vehicle. After the vehicle was secured, Detectives Yee and Cooper applied for a 

search warrant to search respondent’s vehicle and residence. Detective Yee obtained 

that search warrant later in the day on February 28, 2019. Thereafter, Detective Yee 

10 

and others went to respondent’s condominium to conduct a search while Detective 

Cooper searched respondent’s vehicle. 

Detective Yee testified that Detective Cooper found the snap safe lock box in 

respondent’s vehicle and transported it to respondent’s condominium, which was 

being searched. Detective Cooper also found the gun holster and concealed weapons 

permits belonging to respondent in the vehicle. Detective Yee observed as a sergeant 

with SDPD opened the snap safe box at respondent’s condominium showing a loaded 

firearm (a Glock) with an extra magazine inside the snap safe box. Detective Yee 

testified that no officer or detective or any SDPD employee ever exchanged the snap 

safe box found in respondent’s vehicle with another snap safe box found in 

respondent’s condominium. Instead, the snap safe box she observed being opened by 

the sergeant was the same as that found in respondent’s vehicle. Detective Yee also 

photographed the firearm that was inside the snap safe box. Detective Yee wrote a 

report regarding her investigation of this matter that mirrored her testimony. 

TESTIMONY OF MARISELA COOPER 

12.  Detective Marisela Cooper is currently employed by SDPD as a detective 

in the domestic violence unit, a position she has held since 2019. Prior to this position 

she worked for SDPD as an investigator in the narcotics unit. She has been employed 

by SDPD for 13 years and worked as an officer prior to becoming a detective. 

Detective Cooper has extensive experience executing search warrants and preserving 

evidence. She has also undergone narcotics training with SDPD, which includes four 

days devoted to the execution of search warrants and preservation of evidence. Her 

duties as a detective for the domestic violence unit include the investigation of 

domestic violence cases. 

11 

13.  Detective Cooper accompanied Detective Yee on February 28, 2019, to 

arrest respondent at Pacific Beach Middle School. Detective Cooper observed the 

SDUSD officers search respondent’s vehicle that day while the vehicle was parked in 

the school parking lot adjacent to the school. She also observed those officers find a 

snap safe box in respondent’s car, as well as a gun holster under the passenger’s seat. 

Detective Cooper explained that a snap safe box is typically used to store a firearm. 

After the SDUSD officers searched respondent’s vehicle, Detectives Yee and Cooper 

locked and secured respondent’s vehicle and had the vehicle towed to the secure 

storage lot and locked into an evidence cage. Detective Cooper explained that the 

evidence cage where the car was located is only accessible by herself, Detective Yee, 

and the Watch Commander overseeing the secured area. If she or Detective Yee 

wanted to access the vehicle, they would have to request access from the Watch 

Commander. 

14. 

After Detective Yee informed Detective Cooper that she had obtained a 

search warrant for both respondent’s condominium and vehicle, Detective Cooper 

executed the search warrant by searching respondent’s vehicle on February 28, 2019, 

while it was still located in the secure area after requesting access to the vehicle from 

the Watch Commander. Detective Cooper found the snap safe lock box in 

respondent’s vehicle, and she attempted to unlock the box with a key located on 

respondent’s key chain. However, she was unable to open the box. She also found the 

gun holster under the front passenger seat of the vehicle, as well as respondent’s 

military ID, and two concealed weapons permits, one from San Diego County and 

another from the State of Arizona. Detective Cooper took photos of her search of the 

vehicle. She then took the snap safe box, gun holster, military ID, and two concealed 

carry permits to respondent’s condominium where Detective Yee and others were 

conducting a search. Detective Cooper stated that there was a patrol sergeant 

12 

overseeing the search of respondent’s condominium. After Detective Cooper arrived at 

respondent’s condominium, she took the snap safe box, gun holster, military ID, and 

two concealed carry permits to the patrol sergeant and explained that she was unable 

to open the snap safe box. The patrol sergeant met Detective Cooper outside of 

respondent’s condominium and took the snap safe box and threw it on the ground to 

open it. The snap safe box opened to reveal a loaded firearm (a Glock) with a 10-round 

magazine with one bullet in the chamber and an extra magazine in the snap safe box. 

Detective Cooper unloaded the gun for safety reasons and photographed it. Detective 

Cooper then assisted Detective Yee in transporting all of respondent’s firearms, 

including those found in his condominium, to the SDPD headquarters, and impounded 

them for safekeeping or evidence. Detective Cooper wrote a report regarding these 

events that mirrored her testimony at the hearing. 

TESTIMONY OF JUDITH ARCE 

15. 

Judith Arce is currently employed by the commission as a Special 

Investigator, a position she has held for the past three and one-half years. Ms. Arce’s 

duties in that position include review and investigation of various cases on behalf of 

the commission, and writing reports summarizing her findings. She explained that after 

she completes an investigation and writes a report, the commission will review the 

matter in an informal review to determine whether a formal review should be 

conducted. If a formal review is required, Ms. Arce also conducts those investigations. 

16. 

In March 2019, the commission received a report from the Department of 

Justice informing them that respondent had been arrested for criminal conduct, and 

the commission assigned Ms. Arce to investigate the matter. Thereafter, Ms. Arce, or 

one of her coworkers, requested records from the SDPD and the San Diego Superior 

Court regarding respondent’s arrest and conviction. Ms. Arce had obtained those 

13 

records by the Fall of 2019. In November 2019 Ms. Arce contacted L.M. by telephone 

and requested, and soon obtained, an affidavit from L.M. regarding respondent’s 

actions underlying his arrest and conviction. Ms. Arce completed her investigation and 

drafted a report summarizing her findings on January 27, 2020. Thereafter, the 

committee considered Ms. Arce’s January 27, 2020, report during an informal review 

and determined that a formal review should be conducted, which Ms. Arce performed. 

17.  On December 8, 2020, Ms. Arce sent a “Letter of Inquiry” to respondent, 

which she explained was a letter notifying respondent that the commission was 

investigating allegations of his misconduct and would consider charges against him, 

and provided an opportunity for respondent to submit a written response to the letter. 

On March 25, 2021, Ms. Arce and the commission received a letter from respondent in 

which he responded to the December 8, 2020, Letter of Inquiry. 

18.  On April 14, 2021, Ms. Arce completed two reports summarizing her 

investigation of respondent as part of the formal review. The commission reviewed 

and considered both of those additional reports when making its findings regarding 

the formal review. On an unknown date thereafter, the commission made its findings 

regarding the formal review, and found “probable cause to recommend the revocation 

of Respondent’s credential(s) and all other certification document(s).” 

19.  On June 23 to 25, 2021, the commission met and reconsidered its 

findings regarding respondent. In a letter dated July 2, 2021, the commission informed 

respondent that at its June 23 to 25, 2021, meeting the commission reconsidered and 

ultimately recommended to sustain its previous action. 

14 

Respondent’s Evidence 

20. 

Respondent testified on his own behalf and offered the testimony of his 

fiancée, Chalin James; three character witnesses; and a therapist who oversaw his court 

ordered domestic violence program. Respondent also provided various documents 

and videos, which were received in evidence. 

TESTIMONY OF RESPONDENT 

21. 

Respondent is 36 years old and currently self-employed at his own 

property management company, which he opened on September 30, 2021. Prior to 

this position, respondent worked as a special education teacher at Pacific Beach 

Middle School (PBMS), which is part of SDUSD. Respondent stated that he believes he 

is currently on unpaid administrative leave from PBMS, and he stopped working there 

on the day of his arrest on February 28, 2019. Documents received in evidence show 

that SDUSD issued a Notice of Intent to Dismiss respondent from his teaching position 

with the district on August 1, 2022, which was served on respondent at his address of 

record in this matter on August 1, 2022. Respondent testified that he never received 

the Notice of Intent to Dismiss documents. Respondent has an undergraduate degree 

in Business Marketing, a master’s degree in an unknown major, and a doctorate 

degree in Special Education and Curriculum and Instruction. Respondent worked as a 

special education teacher from 2015 to 2019. 

22. 

Respondent has known L.M. since they attended middle school together 

about 25 years ago. Respondent stated that their relationship has “organically 

evolved” and continued into high school. Respondent stated that the relationship 

“accelerated” in 2014. At the time respondent began a romantic relationship with L.M. 

in 2014, L.M. already had a daughter named J.M., who according to respondent does 

15 

not have a relationship with her biological father at all. Respondent was not initially 

close to J.M., but towards the end of 2014 respondent began a father-figure 

relationship with J.M. In late 2015 respondent informed L.M. that he no longer wanted 

a romantic relationship with L.M. However, even after the 2015 break-up, respondent 

continued to “co-parent” J.M. Respondent wrote in his letter to the commission that 

from 2015 to 2019 he was “heavily involved” in J.M.’s life, and was her father-figure, 

despite the fact that he had repeatedly told L.M. he was not interested in a romantic 

relationship with L.M. Respondent stated that he wanted to be a positive male father 

figure to J.M., despite the fact that he was not J.M.’s biological father and not in a 

relationship with L.M., because he had been a fatherless child himself, and had already 

built a relationship with J.M., and did not want to cause her harm. From 2015 to 2019 

J.M. would sporadically stay with respondent at his condominium. 

23.  With regard to the February 26, 2019, incident involving L.M., respondent 

summarily denied any wrongdoing regarding the incident and blamed L.M. for 

everything that happened that day. Specifically, respondent testified that he believes 

L.M. is mentally unstable and is obsessed with him. Prior to the incident on February 

26, 2019, that resulted in respondent’s arrest, at about 3:00 p.m. on February 26, 2019, 

L.M. had texted respondent asking him if his then girlfriend and now fiancée, Ms. 

James, was pregnant because L.M. had been monitoring what Ms. James was doing on 

social media. The text exchange was received in evidence. Respondent texted L.M. that 

Ms. James was not pregnant, and it was none of L.M.’s business. L.M. appeared to be 

angry in the text exchange, and respondent stopped communicating with L.M. by text. 

About 30 minutes later J.M. showed up at respondent’s condominium knocking 

on the door. Respondent went to his master bedroom to look into the parking lot and 

saw L.M. standing in the parking lot. Ms. James was in respondent’s condominium with 

16 

him at the time of this incident. After about four minutes of knocking on respondent’s 

door, J.M. walked back to L.M. in the parking lot. Thereafter L.M. came and “banged” 

on respondent’s door and stated, “I know you are in there and I need to use the 

bathroom.” Respondent did not answer the door or otherwise respond for about five 

minutes. Respondent then thought L.M. and J.M. had left the area, and he opened the 

door when J.M. “popped up” and asked to go inside to get some things. While 

speaking to J.M. with the door open, L.M. appeared and put her foot in the door, 

preventing respondent from closing the door. Respondent stated that L.M. pushed him 

into the condominium and L.M. forced herself inside his condominium. According to 

respondent, L.M. was yelling and cursing at respondent and asking if Ms. James was in 

the condominium. 

Once L.M. was inside the condominium, L.M. saw an iPad on the couch, which 

respondent stated L.M. immediately recognized as belonging to Ms. James, and L.M. 

sprinted over to it “to destroy it.” Respondent went to grab the iPad from L.M. and 

while this was happening J.M. entered the condominium. Respondent stated he 

grabbed the iPad from L.M. “as she was about to throw it.” According to respondent, 

L.M. then “sprinted around my couch and was in the middle of my living room because 

she saw a picture of Chalin on my picture mantle.” L.M. grabbed the framed picture 

and tried to throw it at respondent while yelling obscenities at respondent. The framed 

picture hit the wall, broke the frame, dented the wall, and L.M. picked up the photo 

from the frame and ripped it. Respondent stated that he knew L.M. was extremely 

upset and that L.M. knew there were firearms in his home and where to get them, as 

well as how to use them. Respondent wanted to “remove the threat from my house.” 

Respondent stated that at this point L.M. started to attack him physically by punching 

him in his head and neck area with a closed fist, as well as attempting to kick 

respondent in his legs and lower body. Respondent stated that L.M. threatened to 

17 

shoot and kill respondent, and L.M. knew that respondent had a concealed firearm on 

his person. According to respondent, L.M. reached for the firearm on his person 

several times and yelled, “I am going to kill you.” Respondent stated that he engaged 

with L.M. to protect himself only, but never engaged with her in an offensive manner. 

According to respondent, during the time L.M. was attacking him, she was also 

yelling at J.M. to go get her belongings saying, “because [respondent] got some 

nigger fat bitch pregnant.” Respondent stated that he saw J.M. going back and forth 

between the back room and living room gathering her belongings. At some point L.M. 

turned her attention to respondent’s bedroom because L.M. believed Ms. Jones was in 

that room. Respondent stated that L.M. “sprints as I am trying to hold her around her 

waist” towards that bedroom. Respondent stated he was yelling at L.M. to get out of 

his home and not to behave this way in front of J.M., but L.M. ignored his requests and 

“continued to damage [respondent’s] home.” L.M. then tried to open the door to the 

bedroom where Ms. Jones was located, but the door was locked. Respondent stated 

that he then put himself between L.M. and that door, but L.M. began to “ram her 

shoulder” into his chest in an effort to open the door while yelling obscenities. L.M. 

began to get tired because “it had been about 15 minutes at this point” and “stumbled 

her way back into the living room.” Respondent followed L.M. into the living room 

where L.M. “proceeds to attack [respondent] again” by “swinging at [him] several 

times.” According to respondent, on the last swing L.M. lost her balance, fell on the 

couch, sat down, and rolled off the couch onto the floor. Respondent then “attempted 

to physically remove her from [his] home” by putting his arms under her armpits and 

dragging her out. However, respondent stated he had difficulty doing so because L.M. 

was kicking and punching. L.M. was also “yelling obscenities” and yelling at J.M. to “get 

all of her shit and we are never coming back.” Respondent stated he was “using his 

18 

body as a shield” to get L.M. out of the condominium, which he successfully did. 

Respondent denied ever strangling, body slamming, or threatening L.M. at any point. 

After respondent got L.M. out of the condominium, he followed her in the 

parking lot. Respondent stated that “we are outside and L.M. is attacking me again and 

I thought I have to get this on film, and I took out my cell phone” to record a video of 

the interaction. Respondent offered the video recording, which was received in 

evidence. Respondent testified that he recorded this interaction “to get on film 

everything that had just transpired.” Notably, the video shows respondent following 

L.M. around the parking lot while she is trying to get to her car, but respondent is 

preventing her from doing so. L.M. is seen repeatedly telling J.M. to get in the car and 

lock the doors while respondent prevents L.M. from getting to her car. At one point 

the video shows respondent corner L.M. against a fence (and push her into the fence) 

while repeatedly asking her to admit on video that she hit him. The video shows 

respondent as an aggressor. Additionally, red marks can be seen on L.M.’s neck in the 

video. 

Respondent testified that he had physical contact with L.M. on that day only 

because L.M. forced her way into his home, and he was trying to protect Ms. Jones. He 

stated that he did not call the police or 911 because he has never had a positive 

interaction with the police, and the last time he called the police on L.M. on February 

19, 2017, they did nothing. 

24. 

Respondent stated that L.M. has had a pattern of harassing him. 

Respondent testified that on February 19, 2017, L.M. came to his home and tried to 

break into his home. Respondent stated he asked L.M. to leave the property several 

times but she refused. Respondent called the police, who arrived after L.M. left the 

property. Respondent provided a page “incident history” document from the SDPD 

19 

regarding the incident. Respondent stated that he was very disappointed in the police 

response to the February 19, 2017, incident because the police refused to even go to 

L.M.’s residence to talk to her, and nothing happened as a result of his calling the 

police. Respondent testified about various other incidents involving L.M., including: 

one incident on July 1, 2018, when L.M. showed up at his former residence, which he 

was then renting to another individual, looking for respondent, and another incident 

on July 2, 2018, when L.M. sent an “irate communication” through social media to 

respondent’s fiancée’s father regarding respondent. 

25. 

Respondent testified that he understood by entering a guilty plea in his 

criminal case that the judgment would be deferred, and when he completed the 

required domestic violence program, the case would be dismissed, which it was. 

Respondent stated he understood that meant he would not have a criminal conviction 

as a result of the plea agreement he made with the District Attorney. Respondent 

admitted that he signed the plea agreement with the understanding that his plea 

“would not have any negative ramifications on [his] teaching license.” With regard to 

the handwriting on the plea agreement above respondent’s signature stating: “I 

willfully and unlawfully inflicted a corporal injury resulting in a traumatic injury upon 

the mother of my child,” respondent testified that he did not write that language and 

does not understand it. 

26. 

Respondent also testified, and wrote in his letter to the commission, that 

he is a “huge firearms enthusiast” and has two Concealed Carry Weapons permits 

(CCW), one from California and another from Arizona. With regard to the allegations 

that respondent had a loaded gun in his vehicle on school property, respondent 

denied that allegation outright. Respondent admitted that he had a snap safe box in 

the glove compartment of his vehicle that day, but he claimed that it contained six 

20 

rolls of California quarters because he is a coin collector. He stated that he put the 

coins in the snap safe box to secure them. However, in his letter to the commission 

received March 25, 2021, respondent wrote that the lockbox in his vehicle contained 

“my watch, grandmother’s earrings she gave me before she passed, rings, and several 

other items.” Respondent also admitted to owning three identical snap safe boxes with 

one in his car and two in his home. One of the snap safe boxes in his home contained 

a Glock handgun, but he denied that snap safe box was in his vehicle that day. On 

cross-examination respondent stated that he heard the two detectives testify in this 

matter that they found the Glock handgun in the snap safe box in his vehicle, but he 

stated that those detectives “were mistaken.” Respondent testified that he believes 

“someone could have easily mistaken the boxes because they are identical, and if the 

box in the vehicle was correctly handled and taken into evidence then we would know 

what was in the box [located in his vehicle], but that box was taken to a location with 

other identical boxes.” Essentially, respondent asserts that the detectives took a snap 

safe box from his home and wrongly claimed it was located in his vehicle. 

27. 

In response to the question of “what assurances can you provide to the 

commission that you will not have a lapse in judgment like this again?” respondent 

testified that he did not have a lapse in judgment. Respondent stated that he does not 

understand why the commission has concerns about him keeping his teaching 

credential. 

TESTIMONY OF CHALIN JAMES 

28. 

Chalin James is respondent’s fiancée and has known him since 2011. 

Ms. James testified that she has “encountered L.M.” only on one occasion, but she has 

received messages from L.M. through social media about four to six times. Ms. Jones 

stated that those social media messages essentially stated that respondent was not 

21 

mentally stable, had a family back home, and that Ms. James should leave him and go 

on with her life in Germany. At the time Ms. James received these messages she was 

still living in Germany. Ms. James also stated that the messages called her “nigger, 

girlfriend, homewrecker, bitch, and other insulting words.” Ms. James testified that she 

felt threatened by L.M. and was going to file a restraining order against L.M., but she 

and respondent decided not to do so “for J.M.’s sake.” 

29.  On February 26, 2019, at approximately 3:00 p.m., Ms. James was at 

respondent’s condominium sitting in the living room on the couch, and they heard 

someone knocking at the door. Ms. James stated she learned at some point that both 

L.M. and J.M. were at the door. Ms. James moved to the bedroom, and respondent 

went outside. Eventually L.M. entered the condominium and was very angry. 

Respondent repeatedly told L.M. to leave. Ms. James stated that she heard L.M. call her 

numerous names, such as “pregnant fat nigger, homewrecker, black bitch, etc.” 

Ms. James testified that she could see L.M. in the living room with respondent while 

Ms. James was in the back bedroom because the door was partially open at that point. 

Ms. James stated she saw L.M. reach for the iPad and “was going to throw it against 

the wall.” Ms. James claims to have seen L.M. see Ms. James’s framed photograph, L.M. 

“bolt over to get it,” and L.M. throw the frame against the wall. Ms. James claims to 

have seen L.M. attempt to rip the photograph, but she could not do so and instead 

crumpled it up. L.M. then started attacking respondent by kicking him, slapping him, 

and punching him. Ms. James stated that L.M. said that she would shoot respondent 

and Ms. James. At the hearing Ms. James testified that thereafter L.M. started to move 

toward the back bedroom where Ms. James was located to “try to get” her. At that 

point Ms. James closed and locked the bedroom door. However, in the preliminary 

hearing transcript Ms. James testified that she and respondent both closed the 

bedroom door together. L.M. started banging on the bedroom door trying to get in by 

22 

using her body weight to do so. Ms. James stated that the door “started bending at 

one point.” Ms. James testified that while L.M. was in the hallway with respondent, 

respondent was not physically attacking L.M., but L.M. was continuing to hit 

respondent. 

During cross-examination Ms. James testified that during the time the bedroom 

door was closed and L.M. was in the hallway with respondent, Ms. James could see 

“foot movement” through the gap or slit underneath the bedroom door. She claims 

that she saw this because she was “crouched down and laying flat.” On cross-

examination Ms. James also admitted that from the bedroom with the door open she 

could only see 50 to 60 percent of the living room. Ms. James denied that respondent 

yelled at L.M. that day other than to say, “Get the fuck out of my house.” Ms. James 

also denied that respondent displayed anger towards L.M. that day. 

TESTIMONY OF MONICA CASHIOTTA MUNN, PSY.D 

30.  Monica Cashiotta Munn, Psy.D., is a licensed marriage and family 

therapist, and a psychologist. Dr. Munn conducts group therapy sessions for a 52-

week domestic violence program in which respondent was a participant. Respondent 

attended the group therapy sessions from September 2019 to 2020. The group 

therapy sessions consisted of two-and-a-half hours each week for 52 weeks. Dr. Munn 

explained that participants in this domestic violence program are mandated to take 

the program by the court. Dr. Munn testified that respondent attended every session 

of the program, never missed a group session, and completed a lot of homework. 

Respondent came prepared for each group session, took feedback, and was overall a 

good group member. Dr. Munn was never respondent’s treating therapist. 

23 

TESTIMONY OF RESPONDENT’S CHARACTER WITNESSES 

31. 

Respondent provided testimony from additional character witnesses. The 

first character witness was Jeffrey Mercer Dennis. Mr. Dennis is a licensed attorney in 

California and has been practicing for 25 years. Mr. Dennis has known respondent for 

seven or eight years and met respondent when respondent worked at PBMS because 

Mr. Dennis’s daughter was a student there. Mr. Dennis testified that his daughter spent 

a lot of time with respondent because he helped her through a tumultuous year in 

eighth grade because other students were teasing her. Mr. Dennis stated that 

respondent spent a lot of time with his daughter helping her talk through issues and 

giving her emotional support. According to Mr. Dennis, respondent’s mentorship of 

Mr. Dennis’s daughter did not end in middle school but continued through high 

school as well. Mr. Dennis has never observed respondent as a teacher in his 

classroom and is not familiar with the allegations in this matter, other than his 

teaching credentials are at issue because of respondent’s previous criminal matter, and 

has never seen respondent act violently or unprofessionally. 

32. 

The second character witness was Robert Lewis Brooks. Mr. Brooks is 

currently a border patrol agent, a position he has held for the past 25 years. 

Mr. Brooks first met respondent when Mr. Brooks coached respondent for track when 

respondent was 10 years of age. Mr. Brooks stated that they stayed in touch and 

respondent is close friends with Mr. Brooks’ daughter, who is the same age as 

respondent, and was on the same track team. Mr. Brooks and respondent both 

currently coach high school football together, which they have both done for the past 

four years. Mr. Brooks characterized respondent as patient, detailed, pleasant, 

enjoyable, and football players respect him. Mr. Brooks has never seen respondent act 

violently or have an anger problem. Mr. Brooks is not aware of the allegations in this 

24 

matter other than “there is some kind of domestic violence and some gun charge” at 

issue. 

33. 

The final character witness was Danielle Nicole Gilmour. Ms. Gilmour was 

in a romantic relationship with respondent in 2016 and 2017. Ms. Gilmour testified and 

wrote a letter to the commission, which was received in evidence. In the letter, 

Ms. Gilmour wrote that respondent is “an extremely mild mannered, caring, well-

respected, philanthropist, community man, youth & adult mentor and much more.” 

She further wrote that she has never seen respondent “demonstrate aggression 

towards anyone.” Ms. Gilmour also testified about her knowledge of L.M.’s reputation 

for dishonesty. Specifically, Ms. Gilmour testified that she has never met L.M. in person, 

but that L.M. has reached out to her through social media and through friends of 

Ms. Gilmour during the time period of 2017 to 2019. Ms. Gilmour initially testified that 

L.M. sent her a message through social media instructing her to leave respondent 

alone. However, during cross-examination Ms. Gilmour admitted that she does not 

participate in any form of social media and never received such a message directly, but 

instead L.M. had reached out through social media to Ms. Gilmour’s friends and told 

the friends to tell Ms. Gilmour to stay away from respondent. Ms. Gilmour also stated 

that L.M. created a fake Facebook account with Ms. Gilmour’s name. Ms. Gilmour 

learned this because respondent reached out to her to ask if that was her Facebook 

account, and it was not. Ms. Gilmour stated that the only personal knowledge she has 

of L.M.’s dishonesty consists of instances when L.M. “would say she was with 

[respondent], when Ms. Glimour was with respondent,” so that Ms. Glimour knew L.M. 

was lying. 

25 

Respondent’s Motion to Dismiss Based upon the Statute of 

Limitations 

34.  During the hearing, respondent made a motion to dismiss this matter 

based upon information that came to light from the testimony of Ms. Arce and based 

upon Education Code section 44242.7, subdivision (a). The parties were instructed to 

file briefs on the issue. Education Code section 44242.7, subdivision (a), provides: 

Any allegation of an act or omission by the holder of a 

credential, except for an allegation that involves sexual 

misconduct with a minor or recurring conduct resulting in a 

pattern of misconduct, shall be presented to the Committee 

of Credentials for initial review within four years from the 

date of the alleged act or omission, or within one year from 

the date the act or omission should reasonably have been 

discovered. 

35. 

Respondent asserts that Ms. Arce testified that she received the affidavit 

from L.M. in November 2019, which informed the commission about the act or 

omission of respondent, but the commission did not send the Letter of Inquiry to 

respondent until December 9, 2020, which is over one year from the time the 

commission reasonably should have known of respondent’s act or omission. 

Respondent argues that the statute is “without clarification of whether the four-year or 

one-year limit should be considered ‘whichever occurs first’ or ‘whichever occurs last’.” 

Respondent argues that “whichever occurs first” should apply to interpret the statute 

based on legislative history. Respondent also argues that the commission had L.M.’s 

affidavit on November 22, 2019, which respondent argues is the date that the 

26 

commission initiated its investigation, but sent the Letter of Inquiry on December 9, 

2020, which is outside of the one-year statute of limitation above. 

36. 

In its opposition to this motion, the commission presents three different 

arguments: (1) that there is a lack of jurisdiction to hear a motion to dismiss in an 

administrative hearing as the Administrative Procedure Act provides no clear 

mechanism for deciding them; (2) that the Governor’s Executive Orders N-35-20 and 

N-65-20 issued in response to the COVID-19 pandemic extended the deadlines set 

forth in Education Code section 44242.7, subdivision (a) for at least 120 days making 

the commission’s actions timely even under respondent’s theory of a one-year statute 

of limitations; and (3) that the plain meaning of the statute sets forth that the 

“discovery rule” extends, and does not restrict the four-year statute of limitations and 

the four-year statute of limitations applies in this case. 

37. 

In his reply respondent argues that an Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) 

may rule on a statute of limitations defense and is not barred from doing so under the 

Administrative Procedure Act or applicable case law. Otherwise, a statute of limitations 

defense would be rendered meaningless if the ALJ has no mechanism to address it. 

Additionally, respondent argued that the Governor’s Executive Orders cited above did 

not create an extension of the statute of limitations beyond 60 days of the date of the 

executive order, which at its latest date would be July 18, 2020, which is prior to the 

December 8, 2020, date that both parties agree is the date of initial review applicable 

in this case. Also, pursuant to California Code or Regulations, title 5, section 80306, 

subdivision (b): 

For purposes of Education Code section 44242.7(a), a 

matter is presented to the Committee when the credential 

27 

holder or applicant is notified that the matter is set for 

initial review by the Committee. 

In this case the date that Ms. Arce sent the Letter of Inquiry, December 8, 2020, 

is the date the matter is presented to the committee. 

38. 

As an initial matter, the commission’s argument that an ALJ has no 

mechanism to rule on a motion to dismiss based on the statute of limitations is 

misplaced. While an ALJ has no mechanism to rule on a motion to dismiss prior to 

hearing and receiving evidence and drafting a proposed decision for consideration by 

the agency, there is no statutory or case law that prevents an ALJ from making such 

findings in a proposed decision that an agency may consider for its final decision. 

39. 

Furthermore, the plain language of the statute above makes clear that 

there is no need for a qualifier of “whichever occurs first” or “whichever occurs last” 

with regard to the four-year or one-year limit. If the language of a statue is clear and 

unambiguous, “there is no need for judicial construction and [the court’s] task is at an 

end.” (Little v. Commission on Teacher Credentialing (2022) 84 Cal.App.5th 322, 331-32 

[citations omitted].) Specifically, the statute above requires the commission to have the 

initial review either “within four years from the date of the alleged act. . . or within one 

year from the date the act . . . should reasonably have been discovered.” The “or within 

one year” clause provides an extension of time for the statute of limitations beyond 

the four years for situations involving when the commission discovers or reasonably 

should discover the acts underlying discipline, which is known as the discovery rule. 

There is no language in the statute, and no need for language in the statute, to add a 

qualifier of “whichever is first or last” because adding that language would eviscerate 

the purpose of the discovery rule. The language in the statute is clear as written. 

Applying the statute as written, respondent’s misconduct occurred on February 26, 

28 

2019, and February 28, 2019, and the initial review happened on December 8, 2020, 

which is well within the four-year limit set forth in Education Code section 44242.7, 

subdivision (a). Accordingly, the commission is not barred by the statutory of 

limitations in this matter. 

40. 

Based on the findings above, there is no need to interpret the applicable 

time frames for any extensions to the statute of limitations granted by the Governor’s 

Executive Orders in this matter. 

41. 

Based on the above, respondent’s motion to dismiss this matter pursuant 

to Education Code section 44242.7, subdivision (a), is denied. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

Standard and Burden of Proof 

1. 

Where an administrative proceeding involves the suspension or 

revocation of an existing license, the standard of proof is clear and convincing proof to 

a reasonable certainty. (Ettinger v. Bd. of Medical Quality Assurance (1982) 135 

Cal.App.3d 853, 855-856.) “Clear and convincing evidence” requires a high probability 

of the existence of the disputed fact, greater than proof by a preponderance of the 

evidence. Evidence of a charge is clear and convincing as long as there is a high 

probability that the charge is true. (People v. Mabini (2001) 92 Cal.App.4th 654, 662.) 

Complainant has the burden to prove allegations in the accusation. 

Applicable Statutes and Regulations 

2. 

Education Code section 44421 authorizes the commission to privately 

admonish, publicly reprove, revoke or suspend the credential or certificate of one who 

29 

has engaged in immoral or unprofessional conduct, persistently defied or refused to 

obey the laws regulating the duties of persons serving in the public school system, or 

demonstrated evident unfitness for service or for any cause that would have warranted 

the denial of an application for, or a renewal of, a credential. 

3. 

Education Code section 44345, subdivision (e), permits the commission 

to “deny any application for the issuance of a credential or for the renewal of a 

credential made by any applicant who . . . has committed any act involving moral 

turpitude.” This section further provides that any denial pursuant to this section: 

shall be based upon reasons related to the applicant's 

fitness to teach or fitness to perform other duties for which 

that applicant is certificated, or competence to perform the 

duties which the credential would authorize the applicant to 

perform. 

4. 

California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80300, subdivision (a), 

authorizes commission to take “adverse action” against certificate holders which 

includes “a denial, a private admonition, public reproval, suspension or a revocation of 

one or more credentials.” Subdivision (b) provides in part: 

“Aggravating factor” is an event or circumstance which 

demonstrates that a greater degree of adverse action for an 

act of professional misconduct is needed to adequately 

protect the public, schoolchildren or the profession. 

Aggravating factors may include, but are not limited to, the 

following: 

[¶] . . . [¶] 

30 

(3) that the misconduct was surrounded by or followed by 

bad faith, dishonesty or other violation of the laws 

governing educators; 

(4) that the misconduct significantly harmed a child 

entrusted to the care of a credential holder or applicant, 

significantly harmed the public or the educational system 

. . . . 

5. 

There is broad discretion in determining what constitutes immoral 

conduct in the context of teacher disciplinary matters. (California Teachers Assn. v. 

State of California (1999) 20 Cal.4th 327.) Immoral conduct has been defined by the 

courts as follows: 

[T]hat which is hostile to the welfare of the general public 

and contrary to good morals. Immorality has not been 

confined to sexual matters, but includes conduct 

inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, 

indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; or as willful, flagrant, or 

shameless conduct showing moral indifference to the 

opinions of respectable members of the community, and as 

an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public 

welfare. (Palo Verde etc. School Dist. v. Hensey (1970) 9 

Cal.App.3d 967, 972, citing Bd. of Education of San 

Francisco Unified School Dist. v. Weiland, 179 Cal. App 2d 

808, 811.) 

31 

6. 

Unprofessional conduct has been defined as “that conduct which 

breaches the rules or ethical code of a profession or conduct which is unbecoming a 

member in good standing of a profession.” (Shea v. Bd. of Medical Examiners, (1978) 

81 Cal. App.3d 564, at 575; Bd. of Education v. Swan (1953) 41 Cal.2d 546, 553.) 

7. 

Moral turpitude has long been defined, in broad terms, as “baseness, 

vileness or depravity.” (Cartwright v. Bd. of Chiropractic Examiners (1976) 16 Cal.3d 

762, 767 [citing (In re Craig (1938) 12 Cal.2d 93, 97.) It is conduct that, by its very 

nature, evidences inherent bad character. (In re Lesansky (2001) 25 Cal.4th 11, 16, 

citing In re Hallinan (1954) 43 Cal.2d 243, 249, 272 P.2d 768.) 

8. 

Immoral or unprofessional conduct must also be considered in 

conjunction with the unique position of public school teachers, upon whom are 

imposed responsibilities and limitations on freedom of action which do not exist in 

regard to other callings. (San Diego Unified School Dist. v. Commission on Professional 

Competence (2011) 194 Cal.App.4th 1454, 1466.) The determinative test of a charge of 

immoral or unprofessional conduct is fitness to teach, which is a question of ultimate 

fact. (Bd. of Education v. Jack M. (1977) 19 Cal.3d 691.) 

Evaluation 

9. 

Respondent argued at hearing that his September 24, 2019, plea of guilty 

does not constitute a conviction, and as a result is not “conclusive evidence of a 

criminal act.” Notably, respondent’s argument was set forth in his motion in limine, 

which was denied in a Tentative Rulings Regarding Motions in Limine issued on 

November 30, 2022. All of those tentative rulings in the November 30, 2022, order 

were made final on the first day of this hearing. As noted in that order, under 

Education Code section 44009, and existing law, respondent’s guilty plea alone 

32 

constitutes a conviction under the Education Code irrespective of any subsequent 

order dismissing the charges. Furthermore, as set forth in Arneson v. Fox, (1980) 28 

Cal.3d 440, 452, respondent may not collaterally attack his conviction in these 

proceedings, but may present evidence regarding its circumstances, including 

mitigation evidence. 

Despite his guilty plea and the language in that plea admitting that he “willfully 

and unlawfully inflicted corporal injury resulting in traumatic injury” upon L.M., 

respondent repeatedly denied doing so, claimed he did not understand what that 

language means, and refused to take any responsibility for his actions at the hearing. 

While respondent presented evidence that L.M. was obsessed with him, entered his 

home without his permission, used profanity, yelled at him, and exhibited other bad 

behavior, respondent failed to recognize his own bad actions resulting in his 

conviction, which is very serious in nature. Respondent even provided a video of L.M. 

taken immediately after the altercation in his condominium that shows respondent 

following L.M. around the parking lot, preventing her from getting to her car to leave, 

pushing L.M. against a fence, and repeatedly harassing her to get her to admit on 

video that she hit him. The video shows respondent as the harasser in that situation, 

and it also shows red marks on L.M.’s neck, which is exactly where L.M. alleged that 

respondent tried to strangle her. Respondent continues to blame L.M. and fails to take 

any personal responsibility for his actions. 

10.  With regard to the firearm found in respondent’s vehicle, which was 

parked on school grounds at PBMS, the commission presented substantial evidence 

from the testimony of Detectives Yee and Cooper that on February 28, 2019, to clearly 

establish that when respondent was arrested on the school grounds of PBMS, he had a 

loaded firearm (a Glock) in a snap safe box inside his vehicle located on school 

33 

grounds. Both detectives provided credible and clear testimony to establish the chain 

of custody for that firearm showing it was located in respondent’s vehicle on February 

28, 2019, on school grounds. Respondent argued that the detectives and the SDPD 

exchanged a snap safe box from his home with the snap safe box located in his vehicle 

on February 28, 2019. Respondent provided no evidence whatsoever to establish this 

theory, which has no basis. Respondent stopped short of testifying that he thought the 

two detectives were lying about the firearm located in his car, but instead stated that 

he believed the detectives to be “mistaken.” Respondent also testified at hearing that 

the snap safe box in his vehicle that day contained six rolls of quarters, which could 

account for the weight that Detective Yee felt rather than a firearm. However, in his 

letter to the commission respondent claimed that the snap save box in his vehicle 

contained jewelry and never mentioned the coins. Respondent’s testimony regarding 

the firearm in his vehicle was less credible than the testimony of Detective Yee and 

Detective Cooper. 

The Morrison Criteria – Relationship to the Teaching Profession 

11. 

The criteria set forth in Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 

Cal.3d 214, 220, are embodied in California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80302, 

subdivision (a). The factors include the extent to which the conduct has adversely 

affected students, fellow teachers, or the educational community and the degree of 

impact; the proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct; the type of certificate 

held; the extenuating or aggravating circumstances surrounding the conduct; the 

praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the conduct; the 

probability that the questioned conduct will recur; the extent to which adverse action 

may have a chilling effect upon the constitutional rights of the person involved or on 

34 

other certificated persons; and the publicity or notoriety given to the conduct. Those 

factors were reviewed and considered in this decision and summarized below. 

Adverse Impact on Students/Teachers: Respondent’s conduct most definitely 

had an adverse impact on J.M., a child who witnessed the violence between 

respondent and L.M. on February 26, 2019. Respondent’s actions caused harm to J.M. 

Additionally, there was certainly potential adverse impacts on the students and 

teachers at PBMS when respondent brought a loaded firearm into the school parking 

lot. 

Proximity/Remoteness in Time of Conduct: Respondent’s conduct occurred in 

February of 2019, approximately four years ago, making it relatively recent in time. 

Type of Teaching Credential Held: Respondent holds teaching credentials for 

special education students, who are a most vulnerable population of students. 

Extenuating/Aggravating Circumstances: The circumstances underlying 

respondent’s actions arise from a volatile relationship with L.M. However, during the 

hearing respondent continued to refuse to take any personal responsibility for his 

actions at issue in this hearing. 

Praiseworthiness/Blameworthiness of Motive: Respondent’s motive for his acts 

of physical violence against L.M. in the presence of J.M. are unknown, but certainly are 

not praiseworthy. His motives for bringing a loaded firearm onto school grounds are 

also blameworthy as there is no legitimate reason to do so. 

Likelihood of Future Misconduct: Clear and convincing evidence established 

that respondent continues to take no responsibility for his wrongful acts. As a result, 

respondent has presented no evidence to establish that he will not repeat the same 

35 

bad acts in the future. Accordingly, the likelihood that these bad acts will continue is 

high. This is particularly true with regard to the issue of respondent bringing a loaded 

firearm on school grounds because he admitted he has an affinity for firearms, and he 

also denied bringing the firearm on school grounds despite the substantial evidence 

otherwise. Although he did successfully complete the court-ordered domestic violence 

course, he took no responsibility for his actions at this hearing, raising concerns about 

him repeating his actions in the future. 

Chilling Effect: No evidence was presented to demonstrate that an adverse 

action against respondent would have a chilling effect upon the constitutional rights 

of the person involved or on other certificated persons. 

Publicity or Notoriety of the Conduct: Clear and convincing evidence 

established that there was no publicity or notoriety of respondent’s conduct. 

Cause for Adverse Action 

12. 

Complainant established by clear and convincing evidence cause for 

adverse action against respondent’s credential pursuant to Section 44421 because 

respondent engaged in unprofessional conduct by intentionally and unlawfully 

inflicting harm on L.M. in the presence of J.M., a child; as well as by bringing a loaded 

firearm onto school grounds on February 28, 2019. 

13. 

Complainant established by clear and convincing evidence cause for 

adverse action against respondent’s credential pursuant to Section 44421 because 

respondent engaged in immoral conduct by intentionally and unlawfully inflicting 

harm on L.M. in the presence of J.M., a child; as well as by bringing a loaded firearm 

onto school grounds on February 28, 2019. 

36 

14. 

Complainant established by clear and convincing evidence cause for 

adverse action against respondent’s credential pursuant to Sections 44421 and 44345, 

subdivision (3), because respondent engaged in moral turpitude by intentionally and 

unlawfully inflicting harm on L.M. in the presence of J.M., a child; as well as by bringing 

a loaded firearm onto school grounds on February 28, 2019. 

15. 

Complainant established by clear and convincing evidence cause for 

adverse action against respondent’s credential pursuant to Section 44421 because 

respondent demonstrated inadequacies indicating an evident unfitness for service by 

intentionally and unlawfully inflicting harm on L.M. in the presence of J.M., a child; as 

well as by bringing a loaded firearm onto school grounds on February 28, 2019. 

Factors in Aggravation Alleged 

16. 

Complainant alleged respondent engaged in misconduct that was 

surrounded by or followed by bad faith, dishonesty, or other violation of the law; and 

engaged in misconduct that significantly harmed a child trusted to his care and the 

public. Clear and convincing evidence established that respondent engaged in the 

misconduct of intentionally and unlawfully inflicting harm on L.M. in the presence of 

J.M., a child; as well as by bringing a loaded firearm onto school grounds on February 

28, 2019, and he continued to deny all of these allegations at hearing, which 

demonstrates dishonesty. Furthermore, clear and convincing evidence established that 

respondent’s misconduct above harmed J.M., a child trusted to his care because 

respondent was J.M.’s father-figure at that time. These factors in aggravation establish 

good cause to impose a greater degree of adverse action in this case. 

37 

Degree of Adverse Action 

17. 

The degree of adverse action to impose in this case requires 

consideration of the Morrison Factors as discussed above, as well as consideration of 

the factors in aggravation. Respondent’s actions were very serious in nature and 

caused harm to J.M. Respondent continues to take no responsibility for his actions and 

instead blames L.M. Additionally, with regard to the loaded firearm on school grounds, 

respondent continues to deny he ever brought a loaded firearm onto school grounds 

despite the clear and convincing evidence that proves otherwise. These circumstances 

demonstrate a high likelihood of repetition of his misconduct. Respondent provided 

character witnesses at the hearing, but they did not know the specifics of the 

allegations making their testimony less persuasive, he provided no evidence of any 

positive evaluations of his teaching from supervisors or SDUSD, and no testimony from 

other teachers or supervisors regarding his teaching. While he did successfully 

complete his court-ordered classes, he has done nothing else. 

Taking into account all the circumstances presented in this matter, it is 

concluded that the only measure that will provide public protection is the revocation 

of respondent’s teaching credentials, certifications and authorizations. This measure of 

adverse action is the most appropriate under the circumstances. 

// 

// 

38 

ORDER 

All credentials, certificates, and authorizations issued to respondent Jeremy 

Lamont Henderson by the Commission on Teacher Credentialing are revoked. 

DATE: January 19, 2022

DEBRA D. NYE-PERKINS 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings 

39 

 
 
 
