BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Accusation and Statement of Issues 

Against: 

SARAH MARIE CHAPMAN, 

Certificate of Clearance 

30-Day Substitute Teaching Permit  

Respondent 

Case No. 2-200417229 

OAH No. 2022120118 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Abraham M. Levy, Administrative Law Judge, State of California, Office of 

Administrative Hearings, heard this matter on May 10, 2023, via videoconference. 

Diane de Kervor, Deputy Attorney General, represented complainant, Mary Vixie 

Sandy, Ed.D., Executive Director of the Commission on Teacher Credentialing of the 

State of California (Commission). 

Sarah Marie Chapman, respondent, represented herself. 

The record was closed, and the matter submitted for decision on May 10, 2023. 

SUMMARY 

Complainant asks that respondent’s Certificate of Clearance (certificate) be 

revoked and her application for a 30-Day Substitute Teaching Permit (permit) be 

denied due to her criminal convictions over a twenty-year period, and her material 

deception in answering a question on her application for the permit. After giving due 

consideration to the applicable factors in Morrison v. State Bd. of Education (1969) 1 

Cal.3d 214, p. 235 (“Morrison factors”), and any appliable aggravating and mitigating 

factors, it is determined that revocation of her certificate and denial of her permit are 

not necessary to ensure the safety and welfare of students. A period of probation with 

terms and conditions will ensure their safety and welfare. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

License History 

1. 

A Certificate of Clearance (certificate) was issued to respondent on April 

6, 2018, and expired on May 1, 2023. The Commission retains jurisdiction over this 

certificate pursuant to Business and Professions Code section 118, if the certificate has 

in fact expired. 

On March 3, 2021, the Commission received an application for a 30-Day 

Substitute Teaching Permit (permit). On this date, respondent verified under penalty of 

perjury to the truthfulness of all the statements in the application. 

2 

2. 

Complainant filed and served on respondent an accusation and 

statement of issues in this matter on September 12, 2022. Complainant alleges in the 

accusation portion of the pleading that respondent’s certificate and permit are subject 

to discipline for unprofessional conduct (First Cause for Discipline), evident unfitness 

to serve as a teacher (Second Cause for Discipline), moral turpitude (Third Cause for 

Discipline), immoral conduct (Fourth Cause for Discipline), and material deception in 

application (Fifth Cause for Discipline). Complainant alleges in the statement of issues 

part of the pleading that respondent’s application for a 30-day substitute teaching 

permit is subject to denial because respondent engaged in moral turpitude and 

practiced material deception or fraud in her application for a 30-day substitute 

teaching permit.1 

3. 

As the factual bases for this action, complainant cites respondent’s June 

24, 2021, driving while intoxicated (DUI) conviction in violation of Vehicle Code 

sections 23152, subdivisions (a) and (b), and hit and run, in violation of Vehicle Code 

section 20002, subdivision (a); respondent’s conviction on August 21, 2019, for 

malicious disturbance, in violation of Penal Code section 415, subdivision (2); and her 

August 18, 2003, conviction for making annoying phone calls and threatening crime 

with intent to terrorize in violation of Penal Code sections 653M, subdivision (a), and 

422. 

1 On complainant’s motion, the pleading was amended with this correction at 

paragraph 17: Riverside County Superior Court replaces Orange County Superior Court 

and case number RIF1901612 replaces case number 16HM09818. 

3 

 
In addition, complainant asserts that respondent failed to disclose the pending 

DUI charge when she applied to renew her 30-day teaching certificate on March 3, 

2021. 

4. 

As aggravating factors, complainant asserts that respondent engaged in 

a pattern of multiple acts of wrongdoing and her wrongdoing was “surrounded by or 

followed by bad faith, dishonesty or other violation of the laws governing educators.” 

Respondent’s Convictions, the Facts and Circumstances of the 

Convictions, and Her Answer on Her Application for a Permit 

5. 

Respondent’s convictions and their facts and circumstances are 

summarized first. Her answer to the question on her permit is summarized afterwards. 

RESPONDENT’S CONVICTIONS AND THE FACTS AND CIRCUMSTANCES OF THE 

CONVICTIONS 

6. 

The facts and circumstances of respondent’s arrests and convictions at 

issue in this matter are found in court conviction records, the report of the Orange 

County Sheriff’s Department regarding the DUI arrest, the incident report from the 

Riverside County Sheriff’s Department regarding the malicious disturbance conviction, 

and respondent’s statements to the Commission when asked for a written responses. 

No information was provided regarding the 2003 conviction because records 

regarding it have been purged by the court. 

June 24, 2021, DUI and Hit and Run Conviction 

7. 

Regarding the DUI and hit and run conviction, respondent plead guilty 

on June 24, 2021, in Orange County Superior Court, Case No. 21HM02992, to violating 

4 

Vehicle Code sections 23152, subdivision (a) (driving under the influence of an 

alcoholic beverage or drug), 23152, subdivision (b) (driving with a blood alcohol 

content (BAC) of 0.08 percent or more), and 20002, subdivision (a) (hit and run with 

property damage), misdemeanors. Respondent was placed on informal probation for 

three years, subject to certain terms and conditions. Respondent remains on probation 

for this offense. 

8. 

The facts and circumstances of respondent’s DUI and hit and run are 

summarized here: 

On January 12, 2021, about 8:55 a.m., deputies with the Orange County Sheriff’s 

Department responded to a report of a hit and run traffic collision. Near the collision 

site, deputies found a man helping respondent fix a flat tire on her vehicle. They noted 

that respondent was swaying back and forth and had an unsteady gait, her eyes were 

droopy and watery, her speech was slurred, and her breath emitted the odor of an 

alcoholic beverage. Respondent stated that she drank an alcohol beverage at 

approximately 10:00 p.m. on the previous night. Respondent failed field sobriety tests. 

A Preliminary Alcohol Screening test registered a blood alcohol concentration of 0.113 

percent. Respondent was subsequently arrested under Vehicle Code section 23152, 

subdivisions (a) and (b) (driving under the influence of alcohol). On March 22, 2021, 

she was charged with violating Vehicle Code section 23152, subdivision (b), and 20002, 

subdivision (a). The misdemeanor complainant references that her BAC was 0.094 

percent. 

August 21, 2019, Malicious Disturbance Conviction 

9. 

With respect to the malicious disturbance conviction, on August 21, 2019, 

respondent pled guilty in Riverside County Superior Court, case number RIF1901612, 

5 

to the crime of malicious disturbance in violation of Penal Code section 415, 

subdivision (2), a misdemeanor, and was convicted. This charge was an amended 

charge to the criminal complainant, and the other charges of identity theft and fraud 

were dismissed. Respondent was placed on summary probation for three years, subject 

to certain terms and conditions, including the payment of restitution to the victim. 

10. 

This conviction arose from a report made by a person who said she was 

respondent’s roommate that respondent stole the victim’s credit card and purchased 

items at different stores. At this hearing, respondent denied she stole her roommate’s 

credit card. On February 8, 2019, as documented in an incident report from the 

Riverside County Sheriff’s Department, the Orange County Sheriff s Department 

received a report of identity theft. The victim alleged that an unknown person made 

several unauthorized purchases using two of her credit cards: $769.81 on one credit 

card, and $1,567.86 on another card. The victim stated the only time someone could 

have taken the credit cards from her purse was when she left the purse unattended 

while showering at home. During this time, the victim was renting a room in a house 

where respondent lived. After the investigation, respondent was charged with four 

counts of identity theft of another to obtain credit under Penal Code section 530.5, 

subdivision (a), and intent to defraud under Penal Code section 484g, subdivision (a). 

11. 

Respondent was not convicted of identity theft or fraud, but as noted, 

malicious disturbance under Penal Code section 415, subdivision (2). Malicious 

disturbance is defined as a person who “who maliciously and willfully disturbs another 

person by loud and unreasonable noise.” (Penal Code, § 415, subd. (2).) The factual 

basis of this crime, however, cannot be gleaned from the Sheriff’s Department report. 

It further cannot be gleaned from this same report that respondent committed the 

offenses of identity theft and fraud. Photos taken from the surveillance video in the 

6 

report do not allow for the finding that the person at the stores was respondent. Also, 

clothes found pursuant to a search of respondent’s residence do not allow for the 

finding that these clothes were the clothes the person in the stores wore based on a 

review of the photos in the report. Respondent did not talk to investigators about this 

matter. Surveillance videos from the businesses where the purchases were made, 

which the pleading in this matter references, were not included in the record. 

August 18, 2003, Conviction  

12.  On August 18, 2003, in a criminal proceeding in Orange County Superior 

Court, case number 03CM05844, respondent was convicted of violating Penal Code 

sections 653M, subdivision (a) (annoying phone call: obscene/threat), and 422 

(threaten crime w/intent to terrorize). Respondent was placed on probation for one 

year and was fined. On December 6, 2018, the conviction was dismissed pursuant to 

Penal Code section 1203.4. All police and court documents related to this case were 

purged. As mentioned, respondent does not dispute her conviction for this offense. 

RESPONDENT’S APPLICATION FOR A 30-DAY SUBSTITUTE TEACHING PERMIT  

13.  On March 3, 2021, respondent filed an application to renew her 30-Day 

Substitute Teaching Permit. In the application the following question was posed: “Are 

any criminal charges pending against you?” Although respondent had been arrested 

and had pending criminal charges against her for the DUI, she answered the question, 

“No.” In completing the Oath and Affidavit section of the electronic application on or 

about March 3, 2021, respondent certified under penalty of perjury that all statements 

contained in the application were true and correct. 

7 

Respondent’s Testimony 

14. 

Respondent’s testimony is summarized as follows: 

Respondent acknowledges she is an alcoholic. She has a sobriety date of 

October 14, 2021; the last date she drank alcohol was October 13, 2021. Respondent 

stated that she began drinking in 2007 after the death of her brother, but she did not 

realize it was a problem until she was married. 

Respondent is motivated to maintain her sobriety due to the birth of her 

daughter although she decided to live an alcohol-free lifestyle before her daughter’s 

birth. 

Through Celebrate Recovery at Saddleback Church, a faith-based support 

group, respondent works the 12-steps of recovery, and is committed to maintaining 

her sobriety. Respondent attends two meetings per week, practices the steps daily, 

and does, as she put it, her homework. As an indication of her active participation in 

the group, she has been asked to serve as a leader in step study. Respondent also saw 

a therapist, Katie Strang, Psy.D., from April 5, 2022 to December 17, 2022, for weekly 

individual and group therapy sessions. She has, in addition, undergone 18 sessions of 

Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation as a way to overcome her alcoholism. Respondent 

stressed she has the support of her husband and family, and her family has witnessed 

her recovery and transformation. 

15. 

Concerning the DUI, respondent stated she and her husband had been 

drinking and fighting the night before she drove. In the morning, he asked her to leave 

the residence where they lived, and she left. In her statement to the Commission she 

said she left quickly because the “altercation” with her husband became physical and 

she feared for her safety, and he refused to let her call her family. She admitted she 

8 

should have gone to a neighbor’s house. Respondent said she stopped at a traffic light 

and did not realize she hit another car in a fender bender. But respondent said she 

does not remember much from the circumstances of the incident. 

16. 

Respondent remains on probation for the DUI. Due to the birth of her 

daughter, she was unable to complete part of her probation. She states that she has 

complied with probation. Court records confirm that she in compliance with her 

probation. 

17.  With respect to the malicious disturbance conviction, respondent stated 

she pled to this offense and agreed to pay restitution to the victim as part of the plea 

agreement. She said she does not know the victim. In her statement to the 

Commission, she stated the matter was a case of “mis-identity,” and she did not want 

to go to trial with the chance of being wrongly convicted. She pled guilty to the 

disturbance charge to avoid this possibility. 

18.  With respect to the 2003 conviction, respondent stated that she was 17 

years old and was prosecuted when she was 18. She said she made annoying phone 

calls to the victim and her conduct was “very, very immature.” 

19. 

Regarding her answer on her application for the permit, respondent said 

she should have been more diligent, but she did not intend to deceive the 

Commission. 

Respondent was asked to explain her statement to the Commission that she did 

not disclose the DUI because she wanted to consult with an attorney concerning the 

pending charge due to the “confidentiality of the information” and “the 

embarrassment” she felt over the mistake. She explained that because she was not 

9 

convicted she believed she did not have to disclose it. Respondent said in hindsight 

her answer was unprofessional. 

20. 

Respondent stressed she wants to live out her passion for teaching, a 

career she loves. She has served as a substitute teacher at different grade levels in 

elementary school and finds her work with students rewarding. She has completed a 

master’s degree in education and is working to obtain a cleared credential. 

Respondent said she is willing to do whatever it takes to ensure public protection. 

Character Testimony and References 

21. 

Respondent called as character witnesses her sister, Shahla Chapman, 

Psy.D., LFST, her mother Shahin Chapman, and her husband, Jason Farley. These three 

persons also wrote letters on respondent’s behalf, which have been made part of the 

record. In addition, respondent’s father, Patrick Chapman, Claudia Gilmartin, 

respondent’s leader in the Celebrate Recovery step study who has known respondent 

since November 2021, and Eileen Swift, RN, MSC, a participant with respondent at 

Celebrate Recovery, submitted letters on respondent’s behalf. 

22. 

Dr. Chapman testified she has worked as a therapist in both inpatient and 

outpatient settings and substance abuse recovery centers. She has witnessed 

respondent engage in her recovery on a weekly basis, become a contributing part of 

her support group where she has developed important and positive relationships, and 

she now leads an alcohol-free life. Respondent has grown and matured since the birth 

of her daughter in 2022. She is now better able to address adversity. Dr. Chapman 

stated that respondent is community-minded and recognizes the impact of her 

behavior on others around her. She believes respondent is safe to be with children. 

10 

23. 

Respondent’s mother testified that in recovery respondent has developed 

positive and healthy relationships, and maintained her sobriety and she is proud of 

what she has done. 

24. 

Respondent’s husband also testified to respondent’s commitment to 

leading a sober life, a goal they share. He stated that they attend Celebrate Recovery 

together and are committed to leading a healthy lifestyle. He has witnessed an 

amazing change in respondent and, in his view, she has transformed her life. He said 

she is remorseful for the DUI and has worked to correct what she has done through 

Celebrate Recovery. 

25.  Ms. Gilmartin wrote, as respondent’s leader and accountability partner, 

she has seen respondent’s personal growth. She stated that respondent has been an 

active participant in Celebrate Recovery and respondent is determined to return to 

teaching as a career she loves. 

26. 

In her letter, Ms. Swift stated that respondent “has put in the work” in 

recovery and she has witnessed respondent’s transformation. She said that respondent 

has received training to become a Celebrate Recovery leader to help others. Ms. Swift 

described respondent as a devoted wife and mother. Ms. Swift said she would want a 

person with respondent’s character to teach her children. 

27. 

Respondent’s father stated he has observed respondent’s commitment to 

recovery, and her commitment to the program. He noted she is in the process of 

becoming a 12-step program leader to help others. He believes respondent has turned 

her life around and asks that she be reinstated to the teaching profession. 

11 

Parties’ Arguments 

28. 

Complainant argued in closing that respondent’s certificate should be 

revoked, and her application denied consistent with the “Morrison” factors. She 

asserted that respondent has had a pattern of misconduct, she has a long-standing 

problem with alcohol, and she was dishonest in answering her application for a permit. 

She added that respondent’s conduct is not remote in time, she remains on criminal 

probation, and she is likely to continue her conduct. 

In the alternative, complainant asked that if a disposition less than revocation 

and denial is deemed appropriate, that respondent’s licensure should be subject to a 

five-year probation period with biological fluid testing and that she also be required to 

continue with the Celebrate Recovery support group or similar program. 

29. 

Respondent for her closing referenced her testimony. 

Evaluation 

30. 

Respondent testified credibly overall. Her testimony is substantiated by 

the testimony of family and friends, letters from people who know her, and the record 

as a whole. Respondent is committed to lead an alcohol-free life, she has changed her 

behavior, and she has grown. She is committed to teaching and recognizes the impact 

of her behavior on those around her. 

Respondent’s testimony that she did not intend to deceive the Commission 

when she stated “No” to the question whether she was facing the DUI charge is also 

found credible. At the time she answered the question, the criminal complaint had not 

been filed. She recognizes she should have answered the question differently, but it is 

12 

accepted that her answer appears to have not been done in bad faith to deceive the 

Commission. 

Respondent’s testimony that her harassment of another person around 2003 

was very immature conduct that is unlikely to reoccur is accepted. As mentioned, no 

conclusions can be reached regarding the identity theft and fraud charges for 

purposes of this proceeding. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

Standard of Proof 

1. 

In an administrative hearing, the party asserting the affirmative of an 

issue bears the burden of proof. (Southern Cal. Jockey Club v. Cal. Horse Racing Board 

(1950) 36 Cal.2d 167, 177.) Complainant has the burden of proof with respect to the 

charges in the accusation. Respondent has the burden of proof with respect to the 

charges in the statement of issues. Generally, when a hearing is for the purpose of 

determining whether a license should be issued “the burden may properly be placed 

on the applicant.” (Martin v. Alcoholic Beverage Control Appeals Board (1959) 52 

Cal.2d 259, 265.) 

Applicable Statutes 

2. 

Education Code section 44421 provides as follows: 

The Commission on Teacher Credentialing shall privately 

admonish, publicly reprove, revoke or suspend for immoral 

or unprofessional conduct, or for persistent defiance of, and 

refusal to obey, the laws regulating the duties of persons 

13 

serving in the public school system, or for any cause that 

would have warranted the denial of an application for a 

credential or the renewal thereof, or for evident unfitness 

for service. 

3. 

Education Code section 44345 sets forth specific categories upon which 

the Commission may deny any application for the issuance of a credential. 

Cause Exists to Impose Discipline Against Respondent’s Certificate 

4. 

Complainant alleges that cause exists to discipline respondent’s 

certificate and permit under five different categories: unprofessional conduct, evident 

unfitness for services, moral turpitude, immoral conduct, and material deception on an 

application. These causes are analyzed in the order presented in the pleading. 

5. 

Complainant alleges in the First Cause for Discipline unprofessional 

conduct pursuant to Section 44421. (Ed. Code, §44421.) This section authorizes the 

Commission to impose discipline for unprofessional conduct. It does not, however, 

define unprofessional conduct. In her trial brief, complainant cites the court of appeal’s 

decision in Board of Education v. Swan (1953) 41 Cal.2d 546, 553 for a definition. The 

court in that decision gives this definition of unprofessional conduct: “[u]nprofessional 

conduct is ‘conduct that violates the rules or ethical code of a profession or is 

unbecoming a member of a profession in good standing.’” (Board of Education v. Swan 

(1953) 41 Cal.2d 546, 553.) (Also, see for guidance regarding the meaning of 

unprofessional conduct, Shea v. Board of Medical Examiners (1978) 81 Cal.App.3d 564, 

at p. 575.) 

Thus, for purposes of this matter, any conclusion regarding unprofessional 

conduct requires a finding that respondent violated laws governing the teaching 

14 

profession based on the other causes for discipline or denial as discussed immediately 

below. 

6. 

In the Second Cause for Discipline complainant alleges that respondent is 

evidently unfit to serve as a teacher pursuant to Section 44421, and discipline against 

her certificate should be imposed as a result. (Ed. Code, § 44421.) “’Evident unfitness to 

serve’” . . .  properly means “‘clearly not fit, not adapted to or unsuitable . . . ordinarily 

by reasons of temperamental defects or inadequacies.’” (Woodland Joint Unified 

School Dist. v. Commission on Professional Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th1429, at 

p. 1444, citations omitted.) 

Based on this record, complainant did not prove that respondent has a 

temperamental defect that means she is evidently unfit to serve as a teacher. While 

respondent has recent convictions for DUI and malicious disturbance, the facts and 

circumstances of both convictions do not lead to the conclusion that respondent has a 

temperamental defect that makes her unfit to serve as a teacher. 

With respect to the DUI, respondent testified she now recognizes she is an 

alcoholic, and she credibly stated she has changed her lifestyle to live an alcohol-free 

life, and she is in recovery, thus countering the assertion she has a temperamental 

defect that makes her unfit to serve as a teacher due to an alcohol abuse problem. 

Respondent showed she is willing to change her behavior and has taken affirmative 

steps to ensure she does not abuse alcohol again. She also participates in the 

Celebrate Recovery 12-step program, expressed appropriate self-insight, and she 

understands the impact of her use of alcohol on her community. Family members who 

testified substantiated the progress she has made in her recovery. Further, in terms of 

the facts and circumstances of the DUI itself, the facts of the incident do not lead to 

the conclusion she has a temperamental defect. Without excusing her behavior, the 

15 

facts of her DUI suggest the incident arose due to a fight with her husband. She and 

her husband had been drinking the previous evening and her husband asked her to 

leave their residence in the morning, which she did. Although she hit another car in a 

fender bender, and was convicted of hit and run, respondent recognizes the 

wrongfulness of her conduct and made no excuses for it. 

With respect to the malicious disturbance conviction, simply stated, no 

conclusion can be made regarding whether respondent is evidently unfit to teach due 

to this conviction because the incident report offers no factual basis for the malicious 

disturbance conviction. And, further, as found above, no conclusion can be made that 

respondent committed identity theft and fraud, charges against her that were 

dismissed. Standing alone, a conviction for malicious disturbance is not a sufficient 

basis to find that respondent is evidently unfit to serve as a teacher due to a 

temperamental defect. 

With respect to respondent’s 2003 conviction, this conviction is remote in time 

and occurred when respondent was 17 years old. This conduct involved an act of 

immaturity and does not represent a temperamental defect. Respondent expressed 

appropriate regret for harassing another person at the time, and respondent has not 

engaged in similar behavior. 

Concerning respondent’s failure to truthfully answer the question whether she 

was the subject of a criminal investigation for the DUI charge when she applied for a 

30-day substitute teaching permit on March 3, 2021, respondent credibly, as found 

above, testified she did not intend to deceive the Commission. She acknowledged she 

should have read the question more carefully. But with this noted, the question was 

“Are any criminal charges pending against you?” When she answered this question on 

March 3, 2021, she had not yet been charged. Charges against her were filed on March 

16 

22, 2021, and after she signed her application on March 3, 2021. Thus, her answer is 

somewhat understandable and consistent with her testimony that she did not know 

she was facing pending criminal charges since that decision was not for her to make. 

Finally, complainant argues that respondent is evidently unfit to teach because 

she engaged in a pattern of lawlessness over the years. This argument is not found 

persuasive. Respondent has been convicted of three misdemeanor crimes over a 

twenty-year period and two crimes more recently. But these convictions do not involve 

similar behavior to represent a pattern. One conviction occurred in 2003. And as 

noted, no conclusion can be made regarding the facts and circumstances of the 

malicious disturbance conviction. The DUI conviction indicates respondent has the 

capacity to abuse alcohol, but as discussed, respondent credibly addressed her 

recovery efforts. 

7. 

In the Third Cause for Discipline, complainant alleges that respondent 

committed an act or acts of moral turpitude that warrant the imposition of discipline. 

(Ed. Code, § 44435, subd. (e).) The California Supreme Court addressed in In re Kelley 

(1990) 52 Cal.3d 487, the question when crimes involve acts of moral turpitude. The 

court stated in this regard: 

Conviction of some crimes establishes moral turpitude per 

se. These include crimes involving an intent to defraud as 

well as extremely repugnant crimes such as murder. 

[Citations.] Convictions for drunk driving [Fn. Omitted], 

however, do not per se establish moral turpitude. Therefore 

if moral turpitude exists in this case, it must be based on 

the particular circumstances surrounding the convictions. 

17 

[Id., at p. 494.] 

8. 

Based on information in the police report admitted as evidence, 

respondent’s conviction for hit and run and DUI constitutes conduct involving moral 

turpitude. As detailed in the report, on January 12, 2021, at about 9:00 a.m., 

respondent hit another car and continued driving. The driver of the car, whose car 

respondent hit, followed respondent and contacted the police. Responding officers 

found respondent and a man helping her, later identified as her husband, trying to fix 

a flat tire. The reporting officer observed respondent to be visibly intoxicated and 

noticed damage to respondent’s car where she collided with the other vehicle. He 

further observed that respondent swayed back and forth, had an unsteady gait, 

alcohol coming from her breath, and slow slurred speech. She failed field sobriety 

tests. She told officers she and her husband were driving the car. This was not true. 

Two preliminary alcohol screening tests showed BAC levels of 0.113 percent. 

9. 

No conclusion, on this record, can be made as to whether respondent’s 

2003 conviction and 2021 conviction constitute crimes involving moral turpitude. First, 

as discussed earlier, it is not found that respondent’s conviction for malicious 

disturbance constitutes a crime of moral turpitude. The crime of malicious disturbance 

by itself is not a crime involving moral turpitude. Information in the Riverside County 

Sheriff’s report does not identify facts and circumstances of the crime to find 

otherwise. 

10. 

Further, it cannot be found that respondent committed identity theft and 

fraud based on the information in the report itself. Still photos of surveillance video 

taken at the stores are not clear to identify the person in them as respondent. Clothes 

similar to the clothes the person in the photos wore in the stores, which the reporting 

Deputy identified from a search of respondent’s residence, do not support a 

18 

conclusion that respondent was at the stores purchasing items using the victim’s credit 

cards. Respondent denied she committed the offense and charges of identity theft and 

fraud were dismissed. 

With respect to the facts and circumstances of respondent’s 2003 conviction, 

records describing that conviction have been purged. Respondent’s testimony 

regarding the circumstances of the conviction do not lead to the conclusion that the 

crime she was convicted of constitutes conduct involving moral turpitude. 

11. 

In the Fourth Cause for Discipline, complainant alleges that respondent 

committed acts, or an act, of immoral conduct subjecting her certificate and permit to 

disciplinary action. (Ed. Code, § 44421.) Cause does not exist to find that respondent 

engaged in an act or acts of immoral conduct. 

“Immoral conduct,” pursuant to sections 44932, subdivision (a)(1), and 44939,2 

has been defined to mean conduct that is willful, flagrant, or shameless, conduct 

showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the community, 

and as an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public welfare. It is 

sometimes used as synonymous with “dishonesty” or a high degree of unfairness. 

(Board of Education of the San Francisco Unified School District v. Weiland (1960) 179 

Cal.App.2d 808, 811.) Immoral conduct can be construed according to common usage. 

“The term ‘immoral’ has been defined generally as that which is hostile to the welfare 

of the general public and contrary to good morals. Immorality has not been confined 

to sexual matters, but includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of 

2 These sections of the Education Code apply to dismissal actions against 

credentialed teachers. 

19 

 
corruption, indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; or as willful, flagrant, or shameless 

conduct showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the 

community, and as an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public 

welfare.” (Palo Verde Unified School District of Riverside v. Hensey (1970) 9 Cal.App.3d 

967, 972.) 

12. 

Consistent with the definitions of immoral conduct in the decisional law, 

based on this record, respondent’s conduct is not found to constitute immoral 

conduct. Over twenty years, she has had three convictions. The conviction in 2003 is 

remote in time and occurred when she was immature at 17 years of age. She 

expressed appropriate regret for her behavior at that time. Other than her testimony, 

the facts and circumstances of this conduct are not available. Her DUI and hit and run, 

as discussed, were the result of a situation between herself and her husband, and 

although she lacked sound judgment in driving under the influence of alcohol, the 

facts and circumstances do not indicate she acted in a depraved, shameful, or flagrant 

manner. Respondent expressed appropriate regret over the incident and has taken 

steps to ensure she does not abuse alcohol again. No findings can be made regarding 

the facts and circumstances of the malicious disturbance conviction for the reasons 

previously stated. 

13.  With respect to respondent’s failure to honestly answer the question on 

her application for a 30-day substitute teaching permit, and whether this conduct 

constitutes immoral conduct, respondent testified credibly that she made a mistake 

and did not intend to deceive the Commission by her answer. As also discussed, her 

testimony is somewhat consistent with the answer to question whether she was facing 

pending charges because she was formally charged after she answered the question. 

20 

14. 

Complainant alleges in the Fifth Cause for Discipline that respondent’s 

certificate and permit are subject to discipline because she intentionally practiced 

material deception in her application. (Ed. Code, § 44345, subd. (g).) Based on the 

findings immediately above, cause does not exist to find that she intentionally 

practiced material deception in her application. 

Cause Exists to Deny Respondent’s 30-Day Substitute Teaching 

Permit 

15. 

Complainant alleges in closing and in a trial brief she submitted that 

respondent’s 30-day Substitute Teaching Permit should be denied under section 

44345, subdivision (e), because she engaged in an act of moral turpitude for the 

conduct identified above, and because she practiced material deception or fraud when 

she denied that she was facing pending criminal charges in her March 3, 2023, 

application for a permit. 

16. 

For the reasons found above, cause exists to deny respondent’s 

application under section 44345, subdivision (e), because she committed an act of 

moral turpitude when she drove under the influence of alcohol and left the scene of an 

accident she caused on January 12, 2021. 

17. 

Based on the above findings, cause does not exist to deny respondent’s 

application under section 44345, subdivision (g), because she practiced material 

deception or fraud in her application for a permit. 

The Morrison Factors and Aggravating and Mitigating Factors 

18.  Now that cause has been found to impose discipline against her 

certificate and deny respondent’s permit application, respondent’s fitness and 

21 

competency to teach must be assessed under the factors detailed in California Code of 

Regulations, title 5, section 80300. This requires identifying any extenuating or 

aggravating factors surrounding respondent’s conduct. (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80302, 

subd. (a)(4).) 

An individual can be removed from the teaching profession only upon a 

showing that her retention in the profession poses a significant danger of harm to 

either students, school employees, or others who might be affected by her actions as a 

teacher. (Morrison v. State Bd. of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, p. 235.) 

19. 

Criteria set forth in Morrison are embodied in California Code of 

Regulations, title 5, section 80302. The Commission, in conducting its investigation, 

must determine the relationship between the alleged misconduct and the applicant's 

or holder's fitness, competence, or ability to effectively perform the duties authorized 

by the credential. Such relationship may be based on facts which include the following 

factors: the extent to which the conduct has adversely affected students, fellow 

teachers, or the educational community and the degree of impact; the proximity or 

remoteness in time of the conduct; the type of certificate held; the extenuating or 

aggravating circumstances surrounding the conduct; the praiseworthiness or 

blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the conduct; the probability that the 

questioned conduct will recur; the extent to which adverse action may have a chilling 

effect upon the constitutional rights of the person involved or on other certificated 

persons; and the publicity or notoriety given to the conduct. (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, §  

80302, subds. (a)(1)-(8).) 

20. 

Aggravating factors ”are circumstances demonstrating that a greater 

degree of adverse action is needed to adequately protect the public, schoolchildren, or 

the profession. (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80300, subd. (b).) Complainant alleges that 

22 

respondent engaged in conduct that represented a pattern of misconduct and was 

surrounded by or followed by bad faith, dishonesty or other violation of the laws 

governing educators. (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80300, subds. (b)(2) and (b)(3).) 

21. 

“Mitigating factors” are circumstances demonstrating that the public, 

schoolchildren, and the profession would be adequately protected by a more lenient 

degree of adverse action. (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80300, subd. (m).) Potential 

mitigating factors include: (1) absence of any prior record of adverse action over many 

years of educational service, coupled with present misconduct which is not deemed 

most serious; (2) lack of harm to the person who is the object of the misconduct; (3) 

emotional or physical difficulties suffered by the holder which substantially 

contributed to the misconduct, provided that the difficulties were not the product of 

illegal conduct such as illegal substance abuse, and further provided that the holder 

has established through clear and convincing evidence that the holder no longer has 

such difficulties; (4) attestations to the holder’s good character by individuals from the 

educational or general community who are aware of the extent of the holder’s 

misconduct; (5) objective action by the holder, spontaneously demonstrating remorse 

at the time of the misconduct, and recognition of the wrongdoing designed to timely 

make amends; (6) proximity or remoteness in time of the misconduct relative to the 

seriousness of the misconduct; and (7) the nature and extent of subsequent 

rehabilitation. (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80300, subd. (m).) 

Disposition 

22. 

After applying applicable Morrison factors in California Code of 

Regulations, title 5, section 80300, subdivisions (a) and (b), and considering any 

aggravating and mitigating factors, it is concluded that revocation of respondent’s 

certificate and denial of her permit application are not necessary to protect students, 

23 

school employees, or others who might be affected by her actions as a teacher. 

(Morrison, supra, 1 Cal.3d at p. 235.) 

However, due to the nature and severity of respondent’s conduct relating to her 

DUI and hit and run, a period of probation with terms and conditions, including 

random biological fluid testing, participation in a support group, and therapy, is 

necessary to ensure the safety and welfare of students. Consistent with this interest, a 

three year term of probation is deemed sufficient. With terms and conditions of 

probation, revocation of her certificate and denial of her permit application are not 

necessary to ensure public protection and would amount to impermissible 

punishment. (Fahmy v. Medical Board of California (1995) 38 Cal.App.4th 810, 817.) 

23. 

This conclusion is reached for these reasons: Respondent displayed a 

serious lack of judgment both when she decided to drive while under the influence of 

alcohol, and then when she left the scene of an accident she caused while she was 

impaired. By driving under the influence of alcohol, and leaving the scene of an 

accident, respondent’s conduct would reflect negatively on the school and community 

where she may teach. “‘A teacher . . . in the public school system is regarded by the 

public and pupils in the light of an exemplar, whose words and actions are likely to be 

followed by the (students) coming under (her) care and protection.’” (Board of 

Trustees v. Stubblefield (1971) 16 Cal.App.3d 820, at 824 citing Board of Education v. 

Swan (1953) 41 Cal.2d 546, 552.) Also, as additional factors in reaching the conclusion 

that probation is required, respondent’s conduct is recent, and she remains on criminal 

probation. She is thus expected to be on her best behavior. (In re Gossage (2000) 23 

Cal.4th 1080, 1099.) 

24. 

In terms of aggravating factors that complainant argues are present, it is 

not found that respondent’s misconduct represented a pattern of misconduct, or that 

24 

the misconduct was surrounded by or followed by bad faith, dishonesty or other 

violation of the laws governing educators. Respondent’s three convictions over 20 

years do not represent a pattern. The 2003 conviction occurred when respondent was 

young and immature, and the malicious disturbance conviction does not allow for any 

conclusion regarding the conduct that led to the conviction. Respondent’s answer to 

the question on her application does not lead to the conclusion she acted in bad faith 

for the reasons discussed above. 

25. 

A number of mitigating factors are present. Respondent now recognizes 

she is an alcoholic, and she credibly testified she has decided to lead an alcohol-free 

life. To ensure her sobriety, she has taken steps by participating in the Celebrate 

Recovery 12-step program, she has participated in therapy, and she has undergone 

other treatment to address her alcoholism. Family and friends stated respondent has 

transformed herself. 

26. 

In deciding the terms and conditions of probation to impose, it is noted 

that the Commission has not adopted uniform terms and conditions of probation. The 

Commission has, however, requested public comment on proposed disciplinary 

guidelines that would include uniform terms and conditions similar to those of other 

licensing agencies. (See Proposed Disciplinary Guidelines (Feb. 21, 2019) 

https://www.ctc.ca.gov/docs/default-source/commission/agendas/2019-02/2019-02-

5b.pdf?sfvrsn=2 [as of May 17, 2023].) Under Government Code section 11515, official 

notice of that public comment request is made of these proposed guidelines. The 

uniform terms and conditions of probation in the proposed disciplinary guidelines 

have been referenced for the limited purpose of providing guidance as to the format 

of the probation terms and conditions in this case. 

25 

ORDER 

The Certificate of Clearance issued to respondent is revoked. However, the 

revocation is stayed, and respondent is placed on probation for three years, from the 

effective date of this order, on the terms and conditions detailed below. 

Respondent’s application for a 30-day Substitute Teaching Permit is granted; 

however, the permit is immediately revoked, the revocation is stayed, and respondent 

is placed on probation for three years, from the effective date of this order, on the 

following terms and conditions: 

1. Severability Clause 

Each condition of probation contained herein is a separate and distinct 

condition. If any condition of probation, or part thereof, or any application thereof, is 

declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unenforceable in whole or in part, 

or to any extent, the remaining conditions of probation, and each of them, and all 

other applications thereof, shall not be affected. Each condition of probation herein 

shall be separately valid and enforceable to the fullest extent permitted by law. 

2. New Credentials Subject to Order 

Any new credential issued by the Commission to respondent during the period 

of probation shall be subject to this order, and respondent shall be subject to the 

same terms and conditions of probation with respect to any such new credentials, as 

set forth herein. 

3. Compliance with Probation 

26 

Respondent shall fully comply with each and every term and condition of 

probation. During the entire period of probation, respondent shall submit quarterly 

declarations under penalty of perjury, in a format to be approved by the Commission, 

stating whether there has been full compliance with the terms and conditions of 

probation. Respondent shall submit a full and detailed description of any violation of 

any terms or condition of probation on the quarterly declarations. 

Respondent shall submit the quarterly declarations not later than 10 days after 

the end of each quarter which, for purposes of this term and condition, are: March 

31st, June 30th, September 30th, and December 31st. 

4. Cooperation with Commission 

During the entire period of probation, respondent shall fully cooperate with the 

Commission in its monitoring and investigation of respondent’s compliance with 

probation. 

5. Interview with Commission 

During the entire period of probation, respondent shall be available for 

interview either in person or by telephone, with or without prior notice, with the 

Commission. 

6. Notification 

Within five days of the effective date of this order, respondent shall provide a 

true and correct copy of this decision, together with a true and correct copy of the 

petition to revoke probation, which form the basis for the decision, to respondent’s 

employer as defined by the California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80300, 

subdivision (j), if any, and to respondent’s immediate supervisor at that employer. 

27 

Within five days of complying with this notification requirement, respondent shall 

submit proof of compliance to the Commission. 

If respondent changes employment at any time during probation, respondent 

shall again comply with this notification requirement within seven days of accepting 

new employment and shall again submit proof of compliance to the Commission, as 

required herein, within five days of complying with this notification requirement. 

Respondent shall comply with this notification requirement, and proof of compliance, 

as described herein, each and every time respondent changes employment during the 

probationary period. 

Within seven days of this order, respondent shall also notify the Commission in 

writing of the name and address of the current employer with whom respondent has 

contracted or is otherwise engaged to perform education services. Respondent shall 

provide this same information to the Commission within seven days of any change in 

employment and, in addition, shall also provide a full and complete explanation of the 

facts and circumstances surrounding the cessation of employment with the former 

employer. 

7. Maintain Active, Current Credentials 

During the entire period of probation, respondent shall maintain active, current 

credentials with the Commission, including during any period of suspension. 

8. Maintain Current Contact Information 

Within seven days of the effective date of this order, respondent shall notify the 

Commission of a current mailing address, current email address, and current telephone 

number where voicemail or test messages may be left. Within 72 hours of any change 

28 

of mailing address, email address, or telephone number, respondent shall notify the 

Commission of the new mailing address, email address, and telephone number. 

9. Obey All Laws 

Respondent shall obey all federal, state and local laws, including all laws 

governing the education profession in California, and shall remain in full compliance 

with all court orders, criminal probation or parole, and shall make all court-ordered 

payments. 

Except for minor traffic infractions, within 72 hours of any incident resulting in 

respondent’s arrest, the filing of any criminal charges, or citation issued, respondent 

shall submit a full and detailed description of the incident to the Commission. For 

purposes of this condition, a “minor traffic infraction” includes only traffic violations 

which are punishable by a maximum fine of $250, and do not subject the offender to 

incarceration or probation. (See Veh. Code, § 42001; Pen. Code, §§ 17, subd. (d), 19.6 

and 19.8.) 

Within 72 hours of receiving notice of any violation of any court order, criminal 

probation or parole, or failure to make any court-ordered payment, respondent shall 

submit a full and detailed description of the incident to the Commission. 

To permit monitoring of respondent’s compliance with this condition, 

respondent shall ensure that fingerprints are on file with the Commission. 

Respondents residing outside of California can also comply with this fingerprint 

requirement by submitting, within 30 days of the effective date of this order, two 

fingerprint cards (FD-258) and payment of the additional applicable fingerprint fee. 

10. Probation Monitoring Costs 

29 

Respondent shall pay the costs associated with probation monitoring, as 

designated by the Commission, for each year of probation. Probation monitoring costs 

shall be made payable to the California Commission on Teacher Credentialing. Within 

30 days of the effective date of this order, respondent shall pay the Commission the 

prorated probation monitoring costs for the number of months remaining in the 

calendar year. Beginning with the second year of probation, the full year of probation 

monitoring costs shall be paid to the Commission on or before January 31st of each 

calendar year. The total probation monitoring costs for each calendar year may be 

adjusted by the Commission on an annual basis. 

11. Violation of Probation 

Failure to fully comply with any term or condition of probation, or any part 

thereof, shall constitute a violation of probation. If respondent violates any term or 

condition of probation, or any part thereof, in any respect, the matter will be referred 

to the Office of the Attorney General for preparation of a Petition to Revoke Probation. 

After giving respondent notice and an opportunity to be heard, the Commission may 

revoke probation and impose the order that was stayed, i.e., revocation of 

respondent’s credentials. If a Petition to Revoke Probation is filed against respondent 

during probation, or the Attorney General’s Office has been asked to prepare a 

Petition to Revoke Probation against respondent, the Commission shall have 

continuing jurisdiction until the matter is final, and the period of probation shall be 

automatically extended until the matter is final. 

Respondent’s credentials may also be subject to immediate suspension for any 

specified violation of probation as provided in this order. If respondent does not 

comply with any part of a probation condition that includes a consequence of 

suspension for failure to comply, the Commission will notify respondent in writing that 

30 

respondent’s credentials are immediately suspended. Thereafter, the suspension of 

respondent’s credentials shall not be lifted until the effective date of a final decision of 

the Commission on a Petition to Revoke Probation to be filed against respondent. 

If a Petition to Revoke Probation is not filed against respondent within 30 days 

of issuance of the written notification from the Commission to respondent that 

respondent’s credentials are immediately suspended, or respondent is not provided 

with an administrative hearing within 30 days of a written request for a hearing, unless 

respondent stipulates to a later hearing, the suspension shall be dissolved. The 

deadlines established herein shall be computed pursuant to the provisions of sections 

12 through 12c of the Code of Civil Procedure. Where an original suspension has 

dissolved, nothing shall prohibit issuance of another suspension for any additional or 

subsequent violation by respondent as a condition of probation. 

12. Abstention from the Possession and Use of Mood-Altering Substances 

For purposes of this term and condition of probation, banned substances 

include alcohol, marijuana and any of its derivatives, all controlled substances and 

dangerous drugs, and all other mood-altering drugs or substances. 

During the period of probation, respondent shall completely abstain from the 

possession or use of all banned substances. 

CAUTION: Respondent shall not ingest or use any products that contain any 

trace amount of any banned substance such as cold/flu medications, cough syrups, 

diet pills and products, mouthwash, skin care or hygiene products, perfumes, poppy 

seeds, or certain foods and desserts, etc. 

31 

This probationary term does not apply to controlled substances or dangerous 

drugs lawfully prescribed to respondent by a licensed health care professional legally 

authorized to do so as part of documented medical treatment for a bona fide illness or 

condition. Respondent shall provide information regarding any current or former 

treating physician, counselor, or any other treating healthcare professionals as 

requested by the Commission. 

Within five days of receiving any prescription for any controlled substance or 

dangerous drug, respondent shall provide written notification of the following 

information to the Commission: (1) the licensed health care professional who issued 

the prescription including address and telephone number; (2) the name of the 

prescribed controlled substance or dangerous drug, and the strength and quantity of 

the prescribed controlled substance or dangerous drug; and (3) the name, address, 

and telephone number of the pharmacy that filled the prescription. 

Respondent shall also execute a release authorizing the release to the 

Commission of physical health medical records, mental health medical records, 

prescribing records and pharmacy records. The release shall remain valid and in full 

force and effect for the entirety of respondent's probationary period. If respondent, for 

any reason, rescinds the release during her period of probation, the rescission shall 

constitute a violation of probation and respondent's credentials are immediately 

suspended upon written notice from the Commission. 

13. Banned Substances Testing 

Respondent shall participate in random testing for the detection of banned 

substances, which include alcohol, marijuana and any of its derivates, all controlled 

substances and dangerous drugs, and all other mood-altering drugs or substances, at 

32 

a laboratory previously approved by the Commission. Such testing shall include, but 

not be limited to, biological fluid testing (i.e., urine, blood, or saliva testing), hair, 

fingernail, or breath testing, and/or participation in a daily drug screening program 

previously approved by the Commission. Respondent shall bear the expense of such 

testing. 

Respondent shall not perform any service authorized by respondent's 

credentials until respondent has signed up for and is presently participating in banned 

substances testing, and has submitted documentation to the Commission evidencing 

that participation, as required herein. 

Respondent shall make daily contact, each and every day of the probationary 

period, including weekends, holidays, and vacations both inside and outside of 

California, with a laboratory previously approved by the Commission to determine if 

respondent is required to submit a specimen or specimens for testing on that day. 

During probation, respondent shall also promptly submit to testing for the 

detection of banned substances at the direction of respondent's employer, immediate 

supervisor, and/or law enforcement. 

Respondent shall fully cooperate with the Commission and shall, when directed, 

personally appear and provide a specimen or specimens for testing to detect the use 

of any banned substances. All specimen collections shall be observed. 

Any alternative testing site proposed by respondent due to an anticipated 

vacation or travel outside of California must first be approved by the Commission at 

least 30 days prior to respondent's anticipated vacation or travel. As part of the 

approval process, respondent shall provide any and all information about the 

proposed alternative testing site requested by the Commission. Unless previously 

33 

approved by the Commission, respondent shall not utilize an alternative testing site 

and any test results from an alternative testing site which has not been previously 

approved by the Commission shall not be accepted as valid test results. 

If respondent fails to participate in random testing for the detection of banned 

substances, fails to make daily contact with a laboratory previously approved by the 

Commission, fails to personally appear when directed to do so, fails to provide a 

specimen or specimens for the detection of banned substances, tests positive for any 

banned substance, or otherwise violates this condition of probation in any respect, 

respondent's credentials are immediately suspended upon written notice from the 

Commission. 

Any test result registering over the established laboratory cut off level for any 

banned substance, even that which could result from respondent's incidental contact 

with any banned substance, shall be considered a positive test result and, therefore, a 

violation of probation. If respondent has a positive test result for any banned 

substance, respondent's credentials are immediately suspended upon written notice 

from the Commission. 

If respondent has a negative diluted test result, respondent shall submit to 

blood, saliva, hair, fingernail, or breath testing at respondent's own expense as 

directed by the Commission. 

If the Commission determines, for any reason, that a previously reported 

positive test is not evidence of prohibited use, the Commission shall so inform 

respondent and respondent's employer that the positive test will not be treated as a 

violation of probation and that respondent's credentials are no longer suspended. In 

making this determination, the Commission may, but is not required to, consult with 

34 

the specimen collector, laboratory testing facility, respondent, any treating physician 

or other healthcare provider, or any support group facilitator, to determine whether 

the positive test is evidence of respondent's prohibited use of a banned substance. 

14. Psychotherapy 

Within 60 days of the effective date of this order, respondent shall submit to the 

Commission for prior approval the name and qualifications of a California-licensed 

board-certified psychiatrist or a licensed psychologist who has a doctoral degree in 

psychology and at least five years of postgraduate experience in the diagnosis and 

treatment of emotional and mental disorders who will provide psychotherapy to 

respondent. Upon approval, respondent shall undergo and continue psychotherapy 

treatment, including any modifications to the frequency of psychotherapy, until the 

psychotherapist has determined that no further psychotherapy is necessary, and 

respondent has been so notified in writing by the Commission. Respondent shall 

cooperate in providing the psychotherapist any information and documents that the 

psychotherapist deems pertinent and requests. Respondent shall pay all cost of 

psychotherapy treatment. 

The psychotherapist shall consider any information provided by the 

Commission and any other information the psychotherapist deems relevant and shall 

furnish a written evaluation report to the Commission. Respondent shall also have the 

treating psychotherapist submit quarterly status reports to the Commission. 

Respondent shall fully comply with all restrictions and conditions recommended 

by the psychotherapist within seven days of being notified to do so by the 

Commission. If, prior to the completion of probation, the psychotherapist finds 

respondent to be mentally unfit to perform the services authorized by respondent's 

35 

credentials with complete safety to schoolchildren, the education profession and the 

public, the psychotherapist shall immediately inform the Commission of this finding in 

writing. Respondent shall thereafter receive written notification from the Commission 

that her credentials are immediately suspended, the Commission shall retain 

continuing jurisdiction over respondent's credentials, and the period of probation shall 

be extended until the Commission determines that respondent is mentally fit to 

perform such services. 

Respondent shall execute a release authorizing the release of all information 

regarding psychotherapy treatments, including any psychiatric evaluation and 

psychological testing, to the Commission. The release shall remain valid and in full 

force and effect for the entirety of respondent's probationary period. If respondent, for 

any reason, rescinds the release during the period of probation, the rescission shall 

constitute a violation of probation and respondent's credentials are immediately 

suspended upon written notice from the Commission. 

15. Attendance and Participation in Group Support Meetings 

Respondent shall continue to attend Celebrate Recovery, or other similar 

support group (e.g., Alcoholics Anonymous, Narcotics Anonymous, or other similar 

support group), which has been previously approved by the Commission. Respondent 

shall attend at least one meeting of the approved support group per week for the 

entire period of probation. Verified documentation confirming respondent's 

attendance shall be submitted by respondent with each of the Quarterly Declarations 

to the Commission. 

16. Completion of Probation 

36 

Respondent shall submit full payment of all remaining probation monitoring 

costs not later than 60 days prior to the completion of probation. Upon completion of 

probation, respondent’s credentials shall be fully restored, and this decision will 

continue to remain a matter of public record thereafter.

DATE: May 23, 2023

ABRAHAM M. LEVY 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings

37 

Abraham M. Levy (May 23, 2023 14:41 PDT) 
 
