BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Statement of Issues Against: 

CORNELIUS O. OGUNSALU, Respondent 

Case No. 2-235219201 

OAH No. 2023040932 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Abraham M. Levy, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings 

(OAH), State of California, heard this matter on August 14, 2023, via videoconference. 

Daniel J. Cross, Deputy Attorney General, represented complainant, Mary Vixie 

Sandy, Ed.D., Executive Director of the Commission on Teacher Credentialing of the 

State of California (Commission). 

Jonathan C. Turner, Attorney at Law, represented respondent, Cornelius O. 

Ogunsalu, who was present. 

The record was closed, and the matter submitted for decision on August 14, 

2023. 

SUMMARY 

Complainant asks that respondent’s application for a single subject teaching 

credential be denied because he was previously subject to an adverse action and his 

certification to teach was revoked; he lacks the qualifications to serve as a teacher; he 

engaged in acts of moral turpitude, due to threatening and vulgar emails respondent 

sent to the principal of the school where he worked as a teacher; he incurred criminal 

convictions for electronic harassment and contempt and domestic battery; and he 

engaged in misconduct involving students at the school where he worked. Considering 

the evidence of record as a whole, and after applying the “Morrison” criteria and 

applicable aggravating and mitigating factors, respondent’s application for a certificate 

is denied. 

Jurisdictional Matters 

1. 

The Commission issued respondent a Preliminary Single Subject Teaching 

Credential in May 2008. After an administrative hearing, the Commission revoked the 

credential in 2017. The Commission adopted the decision of the administrative law 

judge and the factual findings made in that decision. 

2. 

On October 1, 2020, respondent submitted to the Commission an 

application for a Single Subject Teaching Credential. The Commission denied the 

application on October 1, 2021, on various grounds: respondent’s conviction in 2000 

for domestic battery, his 2014 non-reelection from teaching at the San Diego Unified 

School District, his 2015 conviction for electronic harassment and contempt, and the 

Commission’s 2017 revocation of his preliminary teaching credential. The 

Commission’s Credential Committee recommended denying respondent’s application 

2 

based on the 2017 revocation, and respondent’s long history of conduct showing he is 

not fit to teach. 

3. 

Respondent timely requested a hearing on this matter and complainant 

filed and served a statement of issues on March 9, 2023. Complainant alleges three 

causes for denial of respondent’s application: Pursuant to Education Code section 

44345, subdivision (f), his application is subject to denial due to the Commission’s 

2017 revocation of his preliminary credential (First Cause for Denial); he lacks 

qualifications related to his fitness to teach or competence to teach under Section 

44345, subdivision (a), (Second Cause for Denial); and he engaged in acts of moral 

turpitude (Third Cause for Denial). Complainant further cites as aggravating factors a 

number of events, that in complainant’s view, warrants a greater degree of adverse 

action including: respondent’s prior record of adverse action; his multiple acts of 

wrongdoing; his conduct significantly harmed a child, the public and the educational 

system; he showed indifference towards the consequences of his misconduct; and he 

had prior notice, warnings, and reprimands for similar conduct.12 

Complainant’s Evidence 

4. 

Complainant relies on three sets of documents to support her position 

that respondent’s application should be denied: The Commission’s decision, effective 

1 At the hearing complainant moved to amend the statement of issues to 

remove the first sentence of paragraph 26. That motion was granted. 

2 Redactions have been made to Exhibit A to remove identifying information of 

a minor. 

3 

 
March 19, 2017, revoking respondent’s preliminary single subject teaching credential, 

and denying his application for a single subject teaching credential; the Superior 

Court, Appellate Division’s Decision/Statement of Reasons affirming the July 2015, jury 

verdict convicting respondent of electronic harassment; and a series of email 

communications respondent sent between January 18, 2017, and January 12, 2018, to 

the Deputy Attorney General (DAG) who prosecuted the disciplinary action against 

respondent, the Commission’s counsel, OAH, the Commission’s Executive Director, and 

other persons. The Commission’s Committee of Credentials (Committee) did not, in its 

findings recommending denying respondent’s application, reference as a basis for its 

recommendation those emails. Respondent objects to them on jurisdictional grounds 

as a basis to support cause to deny his application citing Education Code section 

44242.5, subdivisions (a) and (b). At the hearing complainant argued that, jurisdiction 

notwithstanding, these emails address the issue of respondent’s rehabilitation and 

whether he changed his behavior after the Commission’s March 19, 2017 decision. 

5. 

The Commission’s March 19, 2017 decision and the emails are 

summarized as follows: 

SUMMARY OF MARCH 2017 DECISION 

6. 

The Commission, as noted, revoked respondent’s preliminary teaching 

credential after a hearing in which respondent failed to appear without good cause 

and with notice of the proceeding. 

The Commission adopted the findings of fact the administrative law judge made 

and these findings of fact are accepted as fully adjudicated for purposes of making 

factual findings in this proceeding despite respondent’s failure to appear and present 

a defense to those allegations. The doctrine of collateral estoppel, which precludes 

4 

relitigating in a second proceeding matters litigated and determined in a prior 

proceeding, applies even where the party did not participate in the initial matter 

despite the opportunity to do so. (People v. Sims (1982) 32 Cal.3d 468, pp 477-481 

(citations omitted.)) 

The Commission found that cause existed to take adverse action against 

respondent’s credential because he engaged in unprofessional conduct based on his 

interactions with several students and the principal, Dr. Dodson, at Bell Middle School 

where respondent taught the seventh grade.3 The findings of facts noted the 

following: 

7. 

On September 4, 2013, a student complained to Dr. Dodson that 

respondent told the student, who arrived late for class, in front of the class, to “Wipe 

that stupid smirk off your face.” When Dr. Dodson asked respondent about this 

comment, respondent admitted he told the student to “Wipe that silly smile off your 

face.” The Commission concluded that either statement constituted unprofessional 

conduct, and respondent showed by his tone and nature of the statement a lack of 

respect and disregard for the student’s dignity. 

8. 

After speaking about the incident with respondent, Dr. Dodson 

memorialized it in a brief letter to respondent and indicated in this letter no further 

action against respondent would be taken. The letter was not to be placed in 

respondent’s personnel file. Respondent, as the Commission found, responded 

disproportionally to Dr. Dodson’s letter to him. He first accused Dr. Dodson in an email 

3 Dr. Dodson is referenced as “Dr.” in the Commission’s decision although in 

other materials he is not referred to as “Dr.” 

5 

 
to Dr. Dodson of harassment and attempting to sabotage respondent’s career. He 

advised Dr. Dodson to never approach him without setting up a conference and 

threatened to report Dr. Dodson if he continued his “harassment.” 

9. 

The next week, on a Saturday, outside of school hours, respondent sent 

to Dr. Dodson’s private cell phone a text threatening to “destroy” Dr. Dodson’s career 

due to the informal letter. Respondent texted, “In God’s name I am pleading with you 

not to fuck with me this year,” and “Your leadership and management style sucks for 

lack of a better word.” He asked Dr. Dodson to send him a written apology by Monday. 

Dr. Dodson reprimanded respondent on October 18, 2013, for this communication and 

instructed him to not send any derogatory or threatening messages by phone or 

email. 

10.  On March 11, 2014, the District informed respondent he was not being 

re-elected as a teacher for the next calendar year. The next day, respondent sent to the 

members of the school board, and the entire Bell Middle School staff an email 

detailing his grievances. After the email, human resources placed respondent on paid 

administrative leave for the remainder of the school year. 

11. 

Shortly after being placed on leave, respondent began to send 

Dr. Dodson text messages and emails daily, between March through May 2014, 

including email containing vulgar language insulting Dr. Dodson and threatening him. 

On one day, respondent sent Dr. Dodson 134 text messages, including a message 

where he referenced pulling Dr. Dodson’s “balls through his ass and jamming them in 

his throat.” Another such message, which the Commission quoted in its decision 

without alteration, reads as follows: 

6 

How’s your charge against me with the District Attorney’s 

Office coming along? Two SDUSD police officers visited me 

to inform me you are trying to get me e you fairing on 

administrative leave? LOL! DFEH charge against you has 

already been filed with SDUSD. I am working on a detailed 

30 page PERB charge against you in preparation for the 

eventual section 1983 federal lawsuit. I have to take my 

time filing the PERB charge so I can SLAM DUNK your pretty 

sissy panty boy ass all the way to the U.S. Supreme Court!  

Then I will show you who is the SLAM FUNK MASTER! You 

pissant, motherfucking, miscreant piece of rabid DOG 

SHIT!!!  FICK YOU! 

arrested on a felony.  Is that true!  If so God will strike you 

and destroy you likewise! You WILL NOT succeed in any evil 

machinations against me. How ar 

Make sure you read your district email and complete my 

STULL Evaluation immediately according to the STULL Act 

before the end of . . . 

. . . immediately according to the STULL Act before the end 

of June least you are in gross violation. The BOGUS 

evaluations you caused Marco to enter in my PD 360 

account in violation of my contract has already gotten you 

in BIG SHIT. Now, bury yourself in that BIG SHIT and ROT!  

Punk ass motherfucking ASSWIPE! 

7 

Education Code 44663 mandates that my STULL Evaluation 

and Assessment “shall be reduced to writing and a copy 

thereof shall be transmitted to the certifi 

12. 

As a result of these messages, District counsel sent respondent a cease 

and desist letter. The District then obtained a restraining order against respondent 

after he failed to comply with the cease and desist letter. Respondent, however, 

continued to send Dr. Dodson messages, and respondent was charged with one count 

of violating a court order and six counts of harassment and convicted after a jury trial 

in July 2015. The Commission did not consider the conviction in its decision to revoke 

his certificate and deny his application because conviction documents were not 

submitted into the record. In this proceeding, complainant also did not submit the 

judgment of conviction from the trial court, but did submit into the record the 

Appellate Division’s Statement of Decision affirming the judgment of conviction. 

Respondent expunged the conviction pursuant to Penal Code section 1203.4, 

according to the Commission in its investigation report on March 15, 

2019.Complainant also did not submit evidence relating to respondent’s 2000 

domestic battery conviction. The Commission, however, in its investigation report 

noted that on March 15, 2019, this conviction was also expunged pursuant to Penal 

Code 1203.5. 

13. 

In its March 17, 2017 decision, the Commission found respondent’s 

profanity-laced text to Dr. Dodson in March 2014, extremely hostile and inappropriate, 

for any professional setting, and it constituted unprofessional conduct. Further, the 

Commission found the text displayed respondent’s explosive personality, his inability 

to restrain his emotions, and his refusal to comport his behavior to professional 

standards of communication one would expect between a teacher and his superior. 

8 

14. 

In addition to finding that respondent engaged in unprofessional 

conduct regarding his communications to Dr. Dodson, the Commission also found that 

respondent engaged in unprofessional conduct with regard to his interactions with 

several students. The first incident is described above and occurred in September 

2013. The second incident occurred on February 4, 2014, when a campus police officer 

observed respondent try to pull a backpack away from a student, who was holding 

onto it. Other students witnessed the incident. A third incident involved respondent 

calling a student in front of the class, on March 14, 2014, an “ass” or “jackass.” The 

student’s parents complained, and a conference was held with respondent, the 

student’s parents, and the school principal. The Commission found the statement to 

evidence disrespect for a seventh grade student. 

APPELLATE DIVISION’S STATEMENT OF DECISION 

15. 

In affirming the judgment of conviction on November 1, 2017, for 

electronic harassment under Penal Code section 653m, subdivision (b), and violating a 

court order in violation of Penal Code section 116, subdivision (a)(4), the Superior 

Court, Appellate Division, cites emails that the Commission did not reference in its 

2017 decision, but which complainant cites in the statement of issues in this matter. 

They include the following emails respondent sent to Mr. Dodson: 

“You picked the wrong probationary teacher to fuck with.” 

“In your face, n______!” 

“[I want to] whip [the principal]’s ass and put him in his 

corner.” 

9 

“[I have] bleach to make your high yellow skin white, a 

swiping disease infested cess pit vermin.” 

“Fuck you and burn in hell.” 

16. 

The court further notes in its decision that in May 2014 alone respondent 

sent the principal more than 50 text messages with threatening, vulgar language 

including: “to Saint motherfucking vermin and piece of foul black turd. Jackass. Adult 

that likes to eat shit will definitely throw up when it visits a cess pit to eat shit. Figure 

that out.” In violation of a court order issued at his arraignment in November 2014 to 

not contact Dr. Dodson, respondent sent a number of emails to Dr. Dodson including 

this email the court cited in its decision: “Now you see why you are a clueless fucktard 

and jack ass? So I am ready and not moving on with my life as your punk-ass bitch 

motherfucking brainless, clueless piece of shit is recommending, how dare you.” 

EMAIL COMMUNICATION RESPONDENT SENT IN 2017-2018 

17. 

Between January 2017 and January 11, 2018, as mentioned earlier, 

respondent sent a series of email messages to the Deputy Attorney General who was 

prosecuting the disciplinary action against him before the Office of Administrative 

Hearings and the Commission’s staff counsel. Complainant submitted these emails to 

show that respondent continued to engage in vulgar and threatening communications, 

similar to the communications he sent to Dr. Dodson, both shortly before the 

disciplinary hearing was held and after the Commission’s 2017 decision. Overall, 

respondent’s emails can fairly be characterized as expressions of his anger at various 

persons involved in the legal proceedings against him, and his frustration that things 

did not go his way. These emails are not considered as a basis to warrant cause for 

denial of respondent’s application because the Committee did not reference them in 

10 

its findings of fact warranting denial of respondent’s application. (Ed. Code, 44242.5, 

subds. (a)-(d).)4 But they are considered as evidence that respondent sent vulgar and 

threatening email communications both while his matter was pending before OAH, 

and after the Commission’s decision through January 11, 2018. 

18. 

The emails contain disturbing language with personal attacks and threats 

against both attorneys with some kind of unspecified consequence. In one email 

respondent wrote: “Attempting to criminalize me and make me the big, bad, scary and 

threatening teacher, when [I AM NOT], will definitely backfire on both of you!” In 

another email he wrote: “Back off. . .  I have cautioned you REPEATEDLY!!!” Respondent 

repeated the “back off” threat in another email. 

Respondent numerous times in these emails referred to the DAG and staff 

counsel as “wicked” and “evil,” with the words capitalized for effect. He referred to the 

Commission’s staff counsel as a “vile human being” whose soul was “damned.” In an 

email dated February 6, 2017, to both attorneys, respondent “prayed” that they “BOTH 

suffer a thousandfold, the pain and suffering you have visited upon me. GOD, my 

CREATOR, will stop you!” He added that their “kind of evil and wickedness is what is 

destroying the great fabric of the American tapestry.” “I pray that you will get 

everything bad, evil and wicked that you have directed at me, ten-thousand fold in 

return!” Respondent, further, referred to the DAG as a “slime bucket” in a February 28, 

4 Respondent in his application stated he was convicted of a misdemeanor and 

detailed his criminal history and some of the issues connected with his employment at 

Bell Middle School in an amended letter of explanation to the Commission dated May 

21, 2021. The Committee of Credentials thus had authority to commence an initial 

review of respondent’s application. (Ed. Code, 44242.5, subd. (b).) 

11 

 
2017, email, and advised her to “Pack you [sic] thing and RESIGN IMMEDIATELY. . .  !!!” 

He also referred to the administrative law judge hearing the matter as a “crooked 

weasel and poor excuse for an ALJ.” 

19. 

In an email on January 17, 2017, he accused them of unethical conduct. 

He didn’t specify the conduct. He earlier advised the DAG that he will not participate in 

the hearing, which he stated was a “kangaroo court.”5 

20. 

After respondent received the Commission’s 2017 decision, respondent 

directed an email dated September 3, 2017, to the administrative law judge, the DAG 

and staff counsel referring to them as “essentially criminal coconspirators.” 

Respondent’s Testimony and Evidence 

21. 

Respondent’s testimony, and a letter he sent to the Commission dated 

May 21, 2021, are summarized as follows: 

Respondent was born in Nigeria and came to this country in 1987. He is 

currently attending law school and expects to graduate in 2024. In 2000, he obtained a 

bachelor’s degree from the University of Phoenix in business management and 

masters’ degrees in business administration and international business in 2002 and 

2023, respectively. 

5 Respondent in the January 18, 2017, email also stated that “unethical and 

corrupt-minded lawyers” like them had respondent declared a vexatious litigant to 

stop him from filing three viable lawsuits. He also identified the judges who made this 

determination to be “corrupt.” 

12 

 
22. 

Respondent said he has a passion for teaching, and he is committed to 

working in the profession. From 2004 to 2014, respondent worked practically full time 

as a substitute teacher at various school districts in San Diego County and taught “at 

risk youth” in juvenile facilities. He said principals loved his work ethic and encouraged 

him to teach. He had no issue with colleagues or students. He finally obtained his 

credential to teach through the University of San Diego. 

23. 

After substitute teaching for years, respondent obtained a contract to 

teach at Bell Middle School as a probationary teacher. At first he said everything went 

well, but that changed, he said, when he challenged the school for not giving him a 

contract. He had been working for six months with little pay. 

Through the teacher’s union he retained counsel and a contract. Respondent 

said Lamont Jackson, who was the school human resources director at the time, was 

“livid” and “all hell broke loose” because he got this contract. He said Mr. Jackson and 

Dr. Dodson began to build a case against him to remove him as a teacher. Respondent 

stressed that they just wanted him out of the classroom based on false allegations. In 

response to a question posed to him by complainant, respondent said after he got the 

contract the principal became “the devil.” He noted that Mr. Jackson visited his 

classroom and accused respondent of being a bad teacher. Respondent said he 

objected to Mr. Jackson coming to his classroom. He told him to not come to his 

classroom and threatened to sue Mr. Jackson. At the same time, respondent 

commented that legally the school district did not have to have reasons to non-reelect 

him as a teacher, but they developed reasons. 

24. 

Regarding the backpack incident, respondent testified the administration 

set him up and used the student to target him. He justified his behavior because he 

said the student had a neck chain the student should not have been wearing. He 

13 

added that Dr. Dodson used the incident as a basis for non-reelecting him as a 

teacher. Respondent also said police were called to investigate the incident and after 

talking to him, cleared him. To prove this, respondent submitted a document 

captioned “Departmental Report” with a report date of October 7, 2013. The document 

appears to be a school campus police report regarding the “necklace incident,” not the 

“backpack” incident per respondent’s testimony on cross examination. The document 

clears respondent of this incident, as a matter of criminal conduct, deeming the charge 

“unfounded.” 

25. 

Respondent submitted a letter from a student, JL, apparently from the 

student involved in the necklace incident. In this letter, JL apologized for not 

respecting respondent before the class. 

26. 

Respondent stated that when he was escorted by security to leave the 

school, his heart sank. He explained that he put over a decade into his career in 

education, including getting credentialed through the University of San Diego, and 

wanting to pursue a doctorate in education. Respondent further felt the students 

would be shortchanged by having substitute teachers. 

27. 

After his non-reelection, and before the Commission revoked his 

credential to teach on March 19, 2017, respondent worked as a substitute teacher for 

other school districts. He had no issues during this time working as a substitute 

teacher. 

28. 

Respondent was asked what he learned from the incident. He said by the 

time he left Bell Middle School, he was a basket case and exhausted. He recognizes 

now he was suffering from a deep depression. Respondent added that as a term of his 

criminal probation, he took an anger management course and benefited from the 

14 

course and the books the course recommended. Respondent said he learned ways to 

express feelings in a healthy manner and how to cope with stress. 

29. 

Respondent was asked how he can assure the Commission that he would 

not engage in the same behavior again, and he said if he is not happy about 

something, he would address it in a healthy manner. He added that “what happened 

with Dodson” was a madness and injustice against him, and he reached a breaking 

point. In questions posed to him on cross-examination, respondent did not deny he 

made the statements documented in emails he sent to Dr. Dodson, but said these 

statements were cherry picked and he doesn’t understand why the Commission would 

make “a big deal” about them. He also stated “everything” in the statement of issues is 

a “distortion,” and what happened with the necklace in particular was a “planned 

thing” with the school administration. He said the year before the incident, this student 

was in his classroom and he had no problems with the student. Respondent further 

added that it seemed to him that the administration was instigating the student. 

30. 

Respondent explained further when asked what he would do if he were 

able to go back in time, he “might” have said things with more “tact,” but he feels the 

statements he made were justified because Dr. Dodson was “filth.” He further stated he 

did not think he made a mistake by sending the emails, but he would not send them 

now because he is more knowledgeable about the system. At the same time, he said 

he is in a better place mentally now. He added that he completed anger management 

courses in 2015 in connection with his criminal probation and found what he learned 

meaningful. 

31. 

Regarding the emails respondent sent to the DAG and the Commission’s 

counsel, among others, respondent said he wanted the Commission to know he was 

being railroaded, he was representing himself, the language was protected speech 

15 

under the First Amendment, and he was expressing himself the way people do based 

on his culture in Nigeria. He believes the DAG and staff counsel were in a conspiracy to 

railroad him and suppress the truth, and the DAG did so because respondent is a black 

man from a foreign country. Respondent commented further that the administrative 

law judge was part of this conspiracy. 

32. 

Respondent said that the Commission does not need to be concerned 

about him based on these emails because they happened seven years ago and given 

the time that has passed, he doesn’t understand why we are dealing with the emails 

now. He explained that these emails represented his mindset at the time because his 

life was ruined. 

33. 

Respondent testified that if his credential is granted, he would substitute 

teach again because being in the education environment is his passion. In addition, he 

noted his commitment to helping others, which included sending money to an 

orphanage, helping pay tuition for young adults, and developing a non-profit. 

34. 

Respondent called as a character witness Charles Guthrie. Mr. Guthrie is 

an attorney and represented respondent in the criminal proceeding discussed in this 

matter and considers respondent a friend. He has known respondent for about four 

years. 

Mr. Guthrie considers respondent to be a person of very good character, 

honest, trustworthy, intelligent, and a person of very high ethics. He would trust 

respondent to teach his children. He added that he does not believe respondent 

received fair treatment. 

35. 

Respondent also submitted into the record the following documents: a 

screen shot of a webpage of a non-profit organization he is developing, a research 

16 

project paper he submitted in connection with a course he took in education at the 

University of California San Diego titled “Common Core Aligned Practices and 

Performance Assessments for History Teachers” from May 2014, and his curriculum 

vitae. 

Parties’ Arguments 

36. 

Complainant argued in closing that respondent’s application should be 

denied based on the 2017 revocation of respondent’s certificate, his conduct in 2013 

and threatening communications with Dr. Dodson, and his 2015 conviction for 

harassment. Complainant stated that the facts adjudicated in the Commission’s 

decision were fully litigated and respondent had the opportunity to challenge them at 

hearing but chose not to participate. Complainant cites People v. Sims, supra, for the 

principal that respondent may not collaterally attack the factual findings in that 

decision. 

Complainant stated that respondent did not show he has changed since the 

hearing and decision revoking his certificate. He has the burden of proof to show he is 

rehabilitated and failed to present such evidence. Complainant disputes respondent’s 

contention that his email communications are protected speech, noting that First 

Amendment Protections have their limits, citing People v. Hernandez (1991) 231 

Cal.App.3d 1376, and other cases which have held that protection of persons from 

harassment and annoyance curtail First Amendment protections. Complainant also 

cited Oren Royal Oaks Venture v. Greenberg, Bernhard, Weiss & Karma, Inc. (1986) 42 

Cal.3d 1157 and Alexander v. State Board of Examiners (1991) 231 Cal.App.3d 92, for 

the proposition that certain statements can be used in judicial proceedings. 

17 

Complainant disagreed with respondent’s assertion that the Commission lacks 

jurisdiction regarding the emails sent in January 2017 through January 2018. 

Complainant, however, commented that if jurisdiction is an issue, the communications 

show that respondent did not change after 2015. 

With regard to Causes for Denial Two and Three, respondent’s lack of 

qualifications and acts of moral turpitude, complainant asserted the issue here is 

respondent’s fitness to teach. Complainant cited the factors under Morrison v. State 

Bd. of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214 (“Morrison”), which relate to the fitness to teach. 

Respondent, complainant argued, has engaged in a pattern of misconduct, and lacks 

appreciation regarding the nature of his communications, which indicate respondent is 

unfit to teach. 

37. 

Respondent in closing stated he does not contest that cause exists under 

the First Cause for Denial, but contests that cause exists under the Second and Third 

Causes for Denial in part because the 2000 and 2015 convictions have been expunged 

under Penal Code section 1203.4, and the Commission may not consider them as a 

basis to deny respondent’s application. Respondent asserted that rules and statutes 

under which the Commission operates do not allow for the Commission to impose 

discipline based on a conviction that has been expunged, unlike other agencies which 

have such authority. Respondent cited this language in 1203.4 for his view here: “the 

defendant shall thereafter be released from all penalties and disabilities resulting from 

the offense of which they have been convicted,” and thus respondent should have no 

consequence to this licensing matter due to the expunged convictions. 

Respondent further cited by analogy, for his argument that the convictions 

should not be considered under Business and Professions Code section 480, which he 

conceded does not apply to the Commission. Section 480 now does not permit a 

18 

licensing agency operating under the Department of Consumer Affairs to consider an 

expunged conviction to deny a license with certain exceptions. 

Respondent additionally argued regarding his 2017 emails that they are 

protected speech and also can’t be used against him to deny his application. He cited 

respondent’s attacks on the competence and ethics of the attorneys and judge 

specifically. 

Respondent argued nonetheless the Commission lacks jurisdiction under the 

Education Code because certain things need to occur before the Commission may 

have jurisdiction to pursue denial of a certificate. 

With regard to the First Amendment issue respondent raised, respondent 

disagrees that the cases complainant cites apply to the facts in his case. 

The bottom line for respondent is that, applying the “Morrison” factors, 

respondent showed he is fit to teach. The incidents at issue are now remote in time 

and respondent “testified credibly” he is not the person he was eight or nine years 

ago. He said he would handle things differently now. Respondent, further, has a long 

track record of teaching without incident. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Once an administrative agency presents evidence that supports the 

denial of an application for licensure, the burden falls upon the applicant to 

demonstrate rehabilitation and fitness to hold the license. The standard of proof is a 

preponderance of the evidence. (Evid. Code, §§ 115, 500.) 

19 

Cause Exists to Deny Respondent’s Application Certificate 

2. 

Complainant alleges that cause exists to deny respondent’s application 

for a certificate under three different categories: Respondent had a certification 

document revoked, he lacks qualifications, and he committed acts of moral turpitude. 

These causes are analyzed in the order presented in the pleading. 

3. 

Cause exists under the First Cause for Denial to deny respondent’s 

application for a certificate pursuant to Education Code section 44345, subdivision (f). 

This section authorizes the Commission to deny an application of an individual who 

had a certification document revoked. Here, the Commission, effective March 17, 2017, 

revoked respondent’s Preliminary Single Subject Teaching Credential. 

In revoking his certification, as discussed above, the Commission made these 

factual findings: 

First, in a single day, respondent sent 134 texts to Dr. Dodson’s cell phone. In 

one text he sent on a Saturday, respondent threatened to destroy Dr. Dodson’s career. 

He wrote: “In God’s name I am pleading with you not to fuck with me this year.” He 

demanded that Dr. Dodson send him a written apology by Monday. Respondent also 

wrote subsequently to Dr. Dodson “. . . , You pissant, motherfucking, miscreant piece 

of rabid DOG SHIT!!!  FICK YOU!” He also called Dr. Dodson a “Punk ass motherfucking 

ASSWIPE!” Dr. Dodson stated in one communication respondent referenced pulling 

Dr. Dodson’s “balls through his ass and jamming them in his throat.” 

In addition, the Commission found that respondent engaged in unprofessional 

conduct regarding several interactions he had with students. First, on the first day of 

class, September 13, 2013, respondent told a student, who arrived later for class, either 

“Wipe that stupid smirk off your face,” or “Wipe that silly smile off your face.” Next, on 

20 

February 4, 2014, respondent tried to pull a backpack away from this student, who was 

holding onto it in front of other students. And on March 14, 2014, respondent called a 

student an “ass” or “jackass” in front of other students. 

4. 

In the Second Cause for Denial, complainant alleges that respondent 

lacks the qualifications prescribed by the law prescribed by law or regulations adopted 

by the Commission. (Ed. Code, § 44435, subdivision (a).) The analysis of this cause 

requires application of the “Morrison” criteria, as discussed immediately below, and 

the findings made in this decision under the First and Third Causes for Denial. After 

considering the “Morrison” criteria, as discussed below, cause exists to deny 

respondent’s application because he lacks the qualifications to serve as a teacher. 

5. 

In the Third Cause for Denial complainant alleges that cause exists to 

deny respondent’s application for a credential because he engaged in acts of moral 

turpitude. The Commission may deny the application of a person who commits acts of 

moral turpitude. (Ed. Code, §§ 44421, 44345, subd. (e).) The determination whether 

conduct constitutes moral turpitude requires a fact-specific analysis of the conduct. In 

In re Kelley (1990) 52 Cal.3d 487, concerning the question when crimes involve acts of 

moral turpitude, the court stated: 

Conviction of some crimes establishes moral turpitude per 

se. These include crimes involving an intent to defraud as 

well as extremely repugnant crimes such as murder. 

[Citations.] Convictions for drunk driving [Fn. Omitted], 

however, do not per se establish moral turpitude. Therefore 

if moral turpitude exists in this case, it must be based on 

the particular circumstances surrounding the convictions. 

21 

[Id., at p. 494.] 

6. 

Applying this analysis to the evidence of record in this matter, cause 

exists to find that respondent engaged in conduct constituting moral turpitude. 

Respondent was convicted of electronic harassment in violation of Penal Code 

section 653m.6 The conduct documented in the Superior Court’s appellate decision 

constitutes acts of moral turpitude. Respondent’s argument that the Commission may 

not consider this conviction because it was expunged under Penal Code section 1203.4 

is rejected. Education Code section 44008 specifically authorizes the Commission to 

consider a conviction expunged under this section. 

7. 

In affirming his conviction, the appellate court recited specific facts 

supporting the conviction, including the emails detailed above. Their ugly and vulgar 

nature speak for themselves. Further, the court notes, on one day, respondent sent 50 

vulgar and threatening emails to Dr. Dodson. Such abusive, threatening, and vulgar 

communications, contrary to respondent’s argument, are not protected under the First 

Amendment. His right to petition the school district, like the right of free speech, is not 

absolute. (People v. Hernandez, supra; Wolfgram v. Wells Fargo Bank (1997) 53 

Cal.App.4th 43, 56.) 

6 Penal Code section 653m, subdivision (a), reads as follows: “Every person who, 

with intent to annoy, telephones or makes contact by means of an electronic 

communication device with another and addresses to or about the other person any 

obscene language or addresses to the other person any threat to inflict injury to the 

person or property of the person addressed or any member of his or her family, is 

guilty of a misdemeanor. . . “ 

22 

 
8. 

Respondent’s text messages to Dr. Dodson on a Saturday, as found 

earlier in this decision, also constitutes acts of moral turpitude. They involved 

threatening and abusive text messages, and 134 texts respondent sent to Dr. Dodson 

on one day. 

9. 

With regard to respondent’s 2000 convictions for domestic battery and 

violating stay away orders, no conclusions on this record can be made regarding them. 

Complainant did not offer evidence of the domestic battery conviction, or the stay 

away orders, or the facts and circumstances surrounding them. 

10.  With regard to his conduct towards the students as found above, it is not 

found that respondent’s conduct constituted acts of moral turpitude. 

Application of the Morrison Factors and Evaluation of Rehabilitation 

11.  With causes to deny respondent’s application having been found, the 

inquiry now requires evaluating respondent’s fitness to teach pursuant to the 

“Morrison” criteria. An individual can be removed from the teaching profession only 

upon a showing that his retention in the profession poses a significant danger of harm 

to either students, school employees, or others who might be affected by his actions 

as a teacher. (Morrison, supra, 1 Cal.3d at p. 235.) The “Morrison” criteria are embodied 

in California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80302. The factors include the extent 

to which the conduct has adversely affected students, fellow teachers, or the 

educational community and the degree of impact; the proximity or remoteness in time 

of the conduct; the type of certificate held; the extenuating or aggravating 

circumstances surrounding the conduct; the praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of 

the motives resulting in the conduct; the probability that the questioned conduct will 

recur; the extent to which adverse action may have a chilling effect upon the 

23 

constitutional rights of the person involved or on other certificated persons; and the 

publicity or notoriety given to the conduct. 

12. 

Applying these criteria to the evidence of record in this matter, it is found 

that respondent would pose a significant risk of harm to students and school staff if he 

were returned as a teacher to the classroom, and he is unfit to serve as a teacher 

accordingly. This conclusion is reached for these reasons: First, respondent offered no 

assurance he would not repeat the type of threatening, disturbing, and vulgar 

communications he engaged in with the school principal, Dr. Dodson, if he were 

criticized or instructed at a school in a way he did not like. It is clear from his testimony 

that respondent is not chastened by the disturbing things he wrote; he does not see 

any problem with the texts and emails he sent Dr. Dodson, among others. In his 

testimony he tried to justify them by a misplaced belief that the First Amendment 

absolutely protected his right to send the text and emails he sent, he had to do what 

he did because he was faced with a situation caused by Dr. Dodson, and he was 

expressing himself in a culturally appropriate way. Only reluctantly, and only after 

repeated questions, did respondent express some half-hearted regret for his texts. He 

said he could have used more “tact” in his communications, and he is in a different 

place now. His assertion that his response was situational due to his treatment is 

contradicted by the abusive and threatening emails he sent to the DAG who 

prosecuted the disciplinary action against him and Commission counsel between 

January 2017 and January 2018. These abusive emails are similar in tone to the texts 

respondent sent to Dr. Dodson, and they were sent after he was convicted of 

electronic harassment. It suggests, for purposes of evaluating whether he is 

rehabilitated and now fit to serve as a teacher, that respondent has not gained any 

meaningful insight into his conduct in 2013 and 2014. Fully acknowledging the 

24 

wrongfulness of past actions is an essential step towards rehabilitation. (Seide v. 

Committee of Bar Examiners (1989) 49 Cal.3d 933, 940.) 

As additional factors under “Morrison”, respondent’s conduct had an adverse 

effect on Dr. Dodson and administrators at the middle school. Respondent placed 

Dr. Dodson in fear of his personal safety, as evidenced by the District’s need to get a 

restraining order against respondent. Here, it is noted that respondent violated the 

restraining order. He also disregarded Dr. Dodson’s personal dignity and the personal 

dignity of several students as found above. 

13. 

In terms of the aggravating factors complainant cites in the statement of 

issues, a number apply to respondent: He has a history of prior adverse action, as 

found above; there were multiple instances of misconduct; and he showed indifference 

towards the consequence of his misconduct, in particular the emails he sent to 

Dr. Dodson, as discussed immediately above. Respondent also continued to send 

disturbing communications to Dr. Dodson even after he was reprimanded and advised 

not to send such communications, and after the court ordered him not to 

communicate with Dr. Dodson. His emails to the DAG and Commission counsel in 2017 

through 2018 also show respondent’s unwillingness to curtail his use of disturbing and 

vulgar emails. It is not found that his conduct harmed a child, the public, or the 

educational system. 

14. 

As mitigating factors, respondent’s conduct occurred in 2013 and 2014; 

he has taught as a substitute teacher on long term assignments without incident, his 

convictions have been expunged per Penal Code section 1203.4, he completed in 2015  

anger management courses in connection with his criminal probation, and he is 

committed to volunteer work to help others. But these considerations are insufficient 

to conclude that any disposition less than denial is warranted given respondent’s lack 

25 

of remorse, and insight, into the disturbing messages he sent to Dr. Dodson and 

others at Bell Middle School, and his lack of sufficient evidence of rehabilitation. 

ORDER 

Respondent Cornelius O. Ogunsalu’s application for a Single Subject Teaching 

Credential is denied. 

DATE: September 5, 2023

ABRAHAM M. LEVY 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings 

26 

Abraham M. Levy (Sep 5, 2023 13:34 PDT) 
 
 
