BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Accusation Against: 

FANG JIA, Respondent 

Agency Case No. 2-254340493 

OAH No. 2023030740 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Administrative Law Judge Traci C. Belmore, Office of Administrative Hearings, 

State of California, heard this matter on June 7, 2023, by videoconference. 

Deputy Attorney General Molly Selway represented complainant Mary Vixie 

Sandy, Executive Director of the California Commission on Teacher Credentialing. 

Respondent Fang Jia represented himself. 

The record was closed, and the matter was submitted for decision on June 7, 

2023. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1. 

Respondent Fang Jia holds or held four certification documents 

(credentials) issued by the California Commission on Teacher Credentialing 

(commission). 

2. 

On February 25, 2014, the commission issued a Certificate of Clearance 

to respondent. That credential expired on March 1, 2019. On August 6, 2014, the 

commission issued a 30-day Substitute Teaching Permit to respondent. That credential 

was renewed on September 1, 2015, and expired on September 1, 2016. On May 22, 

2015, the commission issued a Preliminary Single Subject Teaching Credential to 

respondent, which expired on June 1, 2020. On May 28, 2020, the commission issued a 

Clear Single Subject Teaching Credential and a Certificate of Clearance to respondent. 

Both credentials issued on May 28, 2020, were in full force and effect at all times 

relevant to this proceeding. 

3. 

At its July 20-22, 2022, meeting, the Committee of Credentials found 

probable cause to recommend suspension of respondent’s credentials. Respondent 

requested an administrative hearing. 

4. 

On January 26, 2023, complainant Mary Vixie Sandy, Ed.D. signed an 

accusation in her official capacity as Executive Director of the commission, seeking to 

impose discipline on the respondent’s credentials, due to respondent’s conviction for 

domestic violence. Respondent filed a notice of defense, and this hearing followed. 

Conviction 

5. 

On January 25, 2022, in the Superior Court of California, County of 

Riverside, respondent was convicted on his guilty plea, of violating Penal Code section 

2 

273.5, subdivision (a), inflicting corporal injury resulting in a traumatic condition upon 

a spouse (domestic violence), a misdemeanor. Imposition of sentence was suspended, 

and respondent was placed on probation for a period of three years with terms and 

conditions that included serving 90 days in custody, which were to be served in a work 

release program; completing a 52-week domestic violence program; completing 20 

hours of community service; and payment of fines and fees. 

6. 

The facts and circumstances of the offense are that on May 8, 2021, 

respondent became angry at his wife for interrupting his ping pong game with a 

friend. Respondent began yelling at his wife and his friend left. After the friend left, 

respondent continued yelling at his wife and started towards her. She grabbed a bar 

stool to try to keep separation from him. Respondent grabbed a chair and began 

swinging it at his wife. She dropped her bar stool, but respondent continued swinging 

the chair striking his wife several times on her back and left side, causing several 

scrapes on her left arm and a two-inch lump on her left elbow. A video of the incident 

was captured by an in-house camera. 

Respondent’s Evidence 

7. 

At hearing, respondent accepted responsibility for the misconduct that 

led to his conviction. Respondent admits that when his wife called the police, he 

thought he was “ok” because he believed his wife started the fight. Respondent stated 

his domestic violence program has helped him learn different strategies for 

responding to his wife being upset. 

8. 

Respondent has been married to the victim for over 30 years. There were 

no prior or subsequent acts of violence toward his wife. Respondent maintains that he 

never denied striking his wife but told the police that “she started it.” Respondent 

3 

regrets what happened and the impact it has had on his life. He watched the video of 

the incident, and it disturbed him. Respondent admits that he was angry because he 

felt he “lost face” to his friend. He realized he should have walked away when he lost 

his temper. Respondent is ashamed of his behavior. 

9. 

Respondent is currently teaching Mandarin Chinese in the Simi Valley 

School District. He states that the district is aware of his conviction. He has completed 

the community service, paid the fines and fees, and had one more domestic violence 

program meeting to complete that requirement. His probation is scheduled to end in 

January 2025. 

10. 

Respondent testified at hearing in an open, forthright, and credible 

manner, consistent with one who was telling the truth. 

11. 

Respondent has taken responsibility for his actions. He is remorseful and 

ashamed of his behavior. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

The Commission is responsible for the credentialing of certificated 

personnel, including issuing credentials and taking adverse action against credential 

holders. (Ed. Code, § 44000 et seq.; Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80000 et seq.) Adverse 

action includes the suspension or revocation of a credential. (Ed. Code, § 44000.5.) 

2. 

The burden of proof is on complainant to show cause for discipline by 

clear and convincing evidence. (Ettinger v. Board of Medical Quality Assurance (1982) 

135 Cal.App.3d 853; Evid. Code, § 500.)  

4 

3. 

Expiration of a credential does not deprive the Commission of its 

authority to impose discipline. (Ed. Code, § 44440, subd. (b).) 

4. 

Administrative proceedings regarding the discipline of professional 

licenses are intended not to punish the applicant or licensee, but to protect the public. 

(Hughes v. Board of Architectural Examiners (1998) 17 Cal.4th 763, 785-786.) 

Causes for Discipline 

5. 

Education Code section 44421 authorizes the Commission to privately 

admonish, publicly reprove, suspend, or revoke the credential of a credential holder 

who has engaged in “immoral or unprofessional conduct,” demonstrated “evident 

unfitness for service,” or for any cause that would warrant the denial of an application 

for a credential. Education Code section 44345, subdivision (e), authorizes the 

Commission to deny an application for a credential if the applicant has committed any 

act of moral turpitude. Complainant alleges four causes for discipline against 

respondent’s credentials: unprofessional conduct, immoral conduct, acts of moral 

turpitude, and evident unfitness for service. 

6. 

“Unprofessional conduct” is conduct that “violates the rules or ethical 

code of a profession or such conduct which is unbecoming a member of a profession 

in good standing.” (Board of Education v. Swan (1953) 41 Cal.2d 546, 553 [citation 

omitted], overruled, in part, on another ground in Bekiaris v. Board of Education (1972) 

6 Cal.3d 575, 588, fn. 7.) Respondent’s causing corporal injury to his wife, constituted 

unprofessional conduct. Cause for discipline exists pursuant to Education Code section 

44421. 

7. 

“The term ‘immoral’ has been defined generally as that which is hostile to 

the welfare of the general public and contrary to good morals.” (Board of Education v. 

5 

Weiland (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811.) Respondent’s battery of his wife causing 

corporal injury to her, constituted immoral conduct. Cause for discipline exists 

pursuant to Education Code section 44421. 

8. 

“Moral turpitude is sometimes used as synonymous with dishonesty, or a 

high degree of unfairness.” (Board of Education v. Weiland, supra, 179 Cal.App.2d at p. 

811 [citation omitted].) Respondent’s battery of his wife causing corporal injury to her 

was an act of moral turpitude. Cause for discipline exists pursuant to Education Code 

sections 44421 and 44345, subdivision (e). 

9. 

Evident unfitness for service” means “clearly not fit, not adapted to or 

unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of temperamental defects or 

inadequacies.” (Woodland Joint Unified School Dist. v. Commission on Professional 

Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444.) Unprofessional conduct is often a lesser 

included form of behavior within evident unfitness for service, but evident unfitness for 

service “requires that unfitness for service be attributable to a defect in temperament 

— a requirement not necessary for a finding of ‘unprofessional conduct.’” (Id. at p. 

1445.) Respondent’s battery of his wife because he was angry that he “lost face” with 

his friend, demonstrated evident unfitness for service at the time of that conduct. 

Cause for discipline exists pursuant to Education Code section 44421. 

Morrison Factors 

10. 

In accordance with Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 

214 and California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80302,1 an examination must 

1 All regulatory citations are to title 5 of the California Code of Regulations. 

6 

 
be made to determine the relationship between the misconduct and the credential 

holder’s fitness, competence, or ability to perform the duties authorized by the 

credential. Factors to be considered include, but are not limited to, the following: (1) 

likelihood that the conduct may have adversely affected students, fellow teachers, or 

the educational community, and the degree of such adversity anticipated; (2) proximity 

or remoteness in time of the conduct; (3) type of credential held; (4) extenuating or 

aggravating circumstances surrounding the conduct; (5) praiseworthiness or 

blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the conduct; (6) likelihood of recurrence 

of the conduct; (7) the extent to which disciplinary action may inflict an adverse impact 

or chilling effect upon the constitutional rights of the person involved or other 

certified persons; and (8) the publicity or notoriety given to the conduct. 

11. 

Upon consideration of all the Morrison factors, it is determined that 

respondent’s misconduct was related to his fitness, competence, and ability to 

discharge the duties authorized by his credentials. The factors are discussed below. 

12. 

The first Morrison factor focuses on the “likelihood” the conduct “may 

have” adversely affected students and teachers, and can include adverse impact on the 

ability to earn the respect of students. (§ 80302, subd. (a)(1); Broney v. California 

Commission on Teacher Credentialing (2010) 184 Cal.App.4th 462, 477.) It is likely that 

knowing that respondent battered his wife because she caused him to “lose face” 

would adversely affect both students and teachers. 

13. 

Respondent’s criminal act occurred two years and one month ago. (§ 

80302, subd. (a)(2).) 

14. 

Respondent held a teaching credential at the time. (§ 80302, subd. (a)(3).) 

7 

15. 

The fourth Morrison factor examines the extenuating or aggravating 

circumstances surrounding the conduct. (§ 80302, subd. (a)(4).) The governing 

regulations also enumerate aggravating factors and mitigating factors to be 

considered in determining the degree of discipline. (§ 80300, subds. (b), (m).) 

“Aggravating factors” are circumstances demonstrating that a greater degree of 

adverse action is needed to adequately protect the public, schoolchildren, or the 

profession. (§ 80300, subd. (b).) None of the aggravating factors listed in the regulation 

apply to this case. 

“Mitigating factors” are circumstances demonstrating that the public, 

schoolchildren, and the profession would be adequately protected by a more lenient 

degree of adverse action. (§ 80300, subd. (m).) Potential mitigating factors include: (1) 

absence of any prior record of adverse action over many years of educational service, 

coupled with present misconduct which is not deemed most serious; (2) lack of harm 

to the person who is the object of the misconduct; (3) emotional or physical difficulties 

suffered by the holder which substantially contributed to the misconduct, provided 

that the difficulties were not the product of illegal conduct such as illegal substance 

abuse, and further provided that the holder has established through clear and 

convincing evidence that he no longer has such difficulties; (4) attestations to the 

holder’s good character by individuals from the educational or general community 

who are aware of the extent of the holder’s misconduct; (5) objective action by the 

holder, spontaneously demonstrating remorse at the time of the misconduct, and 

recognition of the wrongdoing designed to timely make amends; (6) proximity or 

remoteness in time of the misconduct relative to the seriousness of the misconduct; 

and (7) the nature and extent of subsequent rehabilitation. (§ 80300, subd. (m).) 

8 

Respondent has no prior record of adverse action over years of service; 

however, his misconduct is “serious.” Respondent did not provide any character 

references. He is remorseful for his misconduct. It has only been two years since 

respondent’s misconduct, and he is currently on criminal probation. Respondent 

reported a change in his temperament and how he would respond to a similar 

situation. 

16. 

Respondent’s motives for battering his wife are blameworthy, not 

praiseworthy. (§ 80302, subd. (a)(5).) 

17. 

Respondent was married to his wife for almost 30 years when the 

misconduct occurred. He has since changed his attitude towards his behavior. This 

change in attitude is an important factor in assessing whether or not the behavior is 

likely to recur. (See, e.g., Singh v. Davi (2012) 211 Cal.App.4th 141, 149 [in considering 

rehabilitation criteria, change in attitude is “arguably the most important in predicting 

future conduct”].) 

18.  Disciplinary action against respondent would not inflict an adverse 

impact or chilling effect on respondent or others, because there is no constitutionally 

protected speech or behavior involved. (§ 80302, subd. (a)(7).) 

19. 

There was no publicity or notoriety given to the misconduct. (§ 80302, 

subd. (a)(8).) 

Determination of Discipline 

20. 

As determined above, cause for discipline exists, and respondent’s 

misconduct is related to his fitness to hold credentials, such that adverse action may 

be taken against his credentials. The question is what degree of discipline is required 

9 

for protection of the public, schoolchildren, and the profession. Respondent’s 

misconduct was very serious and involved violence. Nevertheless, respondent has 

submitted sufficient evidence of rehabilitation and mitigating factors to show that 

outright revocation of his credentials would be punitive, as it is not necessary to 

protect the public. 

21. 

Education Code section 44421 provides statutory authority for the 

Commission to privately admonish, publicly reprove, suspend, or revoke the credential 

of a credential holder. Suspending respondent’s credential for 180 days is sufficient to 

ensure the protection of students and the public. 

ORDER 

All credentials issued to respondent Fang Jia are hereby suspended from 180 

days from the effective date of this decision. 

DATE: June 28, 2023 

TRACI C. BELMORE 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings 

10 

 
 
 
