BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Accusation Against: 

BRANDEE GRIVOIS, Respondent 

Case No. 2-336384963 

OAH No. 2023030801 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Marcie Larson, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ), Office of Administrative Hearings 

(OAH), State of California, heard this matter by videoconference on October 13, 2023, 

from Sacramento, California. 

Brent O. Jex, Deputy Attorney General, represented complainant Mary Vixie 

Sandy, Ed.D., Executive Director of the California Commission on Teacher Credentialing 

(Commission), State of California. 

Respondent Brandee Grivois appeared at the hearing and represented herself.  

Evidence was received, the record closed, and the matter submitted for decision 

on October 13, 2023. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Jurisdictional Matters 

1. 

On or about June 30, 2020, the Commission issued respondent a Clear 

Multiple Subject Teaching Credential, which will expire on July 1, 2025, unless renewed. 

2 

On or about June 1, 2018, the Commission issued respondent a 

Preliminary Multiple Subject Teaching Credential, which expired on July 1, 2023. 

3. 

Respondent previously held an Emergency 30-day Substitute Teaching 

Permit, issued on November 12, 2015, which expired on December 1, 2018. 

4. 

On January 27, 2023, complainant, acting in her official capacity, signed 

and thereafter filed the Accusation against respondent. Complainant seeks to revoke 

all credentials, certificates, and authorizations issued to respondent, based on 

allegations that she engaged in unprofessional conduct while working as a teacher at 

Butte Vista Elementary School (Butte Vista). Generally, complainant alleges that 

respondent refused to provide proof of COVID-19 vaccination or agree to submit to 

weekly COVID-19 testing. 

5. 

Respondent timely filed a Notice of Defense. The matter was set for an 

evidentiary hearing before an ALJ of the OAH, an independent adjudicative agency of 

the State of California, pursuant to Government Code section 11500 et seq. 

Respondent’s Employment at Butte Vista 

6. 

On August 6, 2021, respondent was hired to teach eighth grade math 

and science at Butte Vista, which is part of the Yuba City Unified School District 

(District). Respondent was hired as a probationary certificated employee of the District. 

2 

7. 

On August 11, 2021, the California Department of Health, State Public 

Health Officer issued a “Vaccine Verification for Workers in School” (Order), which 

provided the following in relevant part: 

I. This Order applies to the following facilities: public and 

private schools serving students in transitional kindergarten 

through grade 12, inclusive, except that it does not apply to 

home schools. Further, it does not apply to child care or to 

higher education. 

II. All schools identified in this Order must verify vaccine 

status of all workers. 

[¶] … [¶] 

C. Workers who are not fully vaccinated, or for whom 

vaccine status is unknown or documentation is not 

provided, must be considered unvaccinated. 

III. Testing requirements: 

A. Asymptomatic unvaccinated or incompletely vaccinated 

workers are required to undergo diagnostic screening 

testing. 

B. Workers may be tested with either antigen or molecular 

tests to satisfy this requirement, but unvaccinated or 

incompletely vaccinated workers must be tested at least 

once weekly with either PCR testing or antigen testing. Any 

PCR (molecular) or antigen test used must either have 

3 

Emergency Use Authorization by the U.S, Food and Drug 

Administration or be operating per the Laboratory 

Developed Test requirements by the U.S. Centers for 

Medicare and Medicaid Services. 

C. Unvaccinated or incompletely vaccinated workers must 

also observe all other infection control requirements, and 

are not exempted from the testing requirement even if they 

have a medical contraindication to vaccination, since they 

are still potentially able to spread the illness. Previous 

history of COVID-19 from which the individual recovered 

more than 90 days earlier, or a previous positive antibody 

test for COVID-19, do not waive this requirement for 

testing. 

D. Schools with workers required to undergo workplace 

diagnostic screening testing should have a plan in place for 

tracking test results and conducting workplace contact 

tracing, and must report results to local public health 

departments. There are IT platforms available that can 

facilitate these processes for schools. 

[¶] … [¶] 

8. 

On October 8, 2021, Michael Reed, Assistant Superintendent of Human 

Resources for the District, sent a letter to District employees regarding the District’s 

COVID-19 vaccination and testing policy. The letter, in compliance with the Order, 

4 

stated those employees who did not provide proof of full vaccination were required to 

submit to weekly COVID-19 testing. The letter also provided in relevant part that: 

Next week, only employees required to weekly test (only 

those employees who have not yet submitted proof of full 

vaccination) will receive information about how to register 

with Covid Clinic. Employees will bs asked to register online, 

fill out insurance and personal-health information, and 

agree to the terms which allow Covid Clinic to bill the 

insurer or Health Resources Services Administration (HRSA) 

for testing. 

During registration with Covid Clinic, each employee will be 

asked to give "consent'' or “authorization” in a few areas to 

prevent the spread of COVID-19. The specifics of which are 

included in the registration process. In general, the areas of 

consent and/or authorization to Covid Clinic for employees 

are to: 

•  Perform and report results of the COVID-19 test for 

and on your behalf to the [District]. 

•  Have the lab sample collected by Covid Clinic or 

MedLab2020. 

•  Have '‘Notices of Positive Results” released to 

applicable public-health authorities. 

5 

•  Consent to the understanding that there is a 

possibility of error in all lab testing. 

•  Authorize and release applicable health information 

related to the intended Purpose of the testing. 

•  Authorize the employee's health insurance company 

to pay Covid Clinic and/or MedLab2020 directly and 

to release necessary information for claims 

processing. 

[¶] … [¶] 

9. 

On September 29, 2021, Mr. Reed sent respondent a letter notifying her 

that she was required to submit to weekly COVID-19 testing. The letter explained that 

her first testing session would occur on October 5 or 6, 2021. Respondent did not 

submit to testing and did not provide proof of her COVID-19 vaccination status. 

10. 

By letter dated October 20, 2021, respondent was informed she was 

placed on unpaid leave status because she refused to comply with the COVID-19 

testing requirements. The letter explains in part that: 

On Friday, October 15, 2021, you were notified by your site 

supervisor of the need to schedule a testing time prior to 

the end-of-day, Wednesday, October 20, 2021. You did not 

respond to this request and instead forwarded an email 

from your direct supervisor to an [sic] Personnel Specialist. 

You added a statement to the email which read, “I do not 

consent to this discriminatory testing.” We have determined 

6 

this email to be a refusal to comply with the District’s 

testing requirements. Therefore, you are not qualified to 

serve in your position with the District and you are hereby 

placed on unpaid leave. Your last date in paid status was 

Tuesday, October 19, 2021. If you fail to submit to weekly 

COVID-19 testing and continue to be insubordinate, the 

District will move forward with disciplinary action, up to and 

including termination. 

11. 

Respondent did not respond to the October 20, 2021 notice. By letter 

dated October 21, 2021, respondent was sent a Notice of Unpaid Status. The letter 

states in part that: 

Since October 20 you have not communicated efforts to 

comply with the District's directive and State Mandate. 

Unless you submit to COVID 19 testing on or before 

Tuesday, October 26 (either by requesting a time to be 

tested here at the District Office or submitting proof 

testing, on or prior to this date) the District will move 

forward with disciplinary action up to and including 

termination. 

12.  Mr. Reed testified at hearing that on October 22, 2021, while respondent 

was clearing out her classroom, he spoke to respondent and gave her another 

opportunity to undergo COVID-19 testing. Respondent did not agree to undergo 

testing. 

7 

13. 

By letter dated November 3, 2021, respondent was notified that Mr. Reed 

was recommending she be terminated from her position with the District. Enclosed 

with the letter was a “Statement of Reasons” outlining the recommendation for 

termination. The grounds for termination were “Persistent violation of or refusal to 

obey the school laws of the state or reasonable regulations prescribed for the 

government of the public schools by the state board or by the governing board of the 

school district employing him or her.” 

14.  On or about December 16, 2021, respondent signed a Settlement 

Agreement with the District, whereby she agreed to resign her position with the 

District. In doing so, the District paid respondent $5,297.60. All documents related to 

respondent’s proposed termination were removed from her personal file. Neither 

respondent nor the District admitted to any wrongdoing. The District’s Board 

approved the Settlement Agreement effective January 11, 2022. 

15.  On or about February 10, 2022, pursuant Title 5, California Code of 

Regulations, section 80303, the District notified the Commission of respondent’s 

resignation in lieu of termination. 

16.  Mr. Reed testified at hearing that when a teacher leaves the District, it is 

disruptive for the students. He provided no examples of how respondent’s unpaid 

leave and subsequent departure from the District caused any disruption or harm to the 

students, public or District. 

Respondent’s Evidence 

17. 

Respondent explained that when she was hired by the District, she was 

not informed of any requirements that she be vaccinated or undergo weekly COVID-19 

testing. Nor did she agree to be vaccinated or submit to testing. It was not until 

8 

several months after she began working for the District that she was informed of the 

vaccine and testing requirements. Respondent explained that she immediately voiced 

her opposition to the requirements. Due to her religious beliefs, she would not agree 

to be vaccinated. Additionally, submitting to COVID-19 testing required her to agree 

to release her medical information and DNA to a lab to disseminate, which she 

believes is an invasion of her privacy. Respondent believed she was exercising her 

constitutional rights. 

18. 

Respondent explained that she tried to work with the District to find a 

solution that would allow her to continue to teach, including teaching remotely. 

However, the District would not agree to provide her any type of accommodation. 

Respondent ultimately decided to resign her position. She immediately found work 

with Proximity Learning, a fully remote virtual school. She worked for Proximity 

Learning for two years as an elementary school teacher. She received a positive 

evaluation from Proximity Learning. 

19. 

In January 2023, respondent’s husband, who is in the military, was 

transferred to Oklahoma. Respondent obtained her Oklahoma teaching credential. 

Since that time, she has worked as a kindergarten teacher for Altus Early Childhood 

Center, for the Altus Public Schools in Oklahoma. Respondent enjoys her position and 

has received a positive evaluation. 

20. 

Respondent explained that she became a teacher because she loves 

teaching and making a difference in children’s lives. Respondent feels she can reach 

children on a level that she did not experience as a child. Respondent spent 15 years 

working on her education career, including obtaining her associate and bachelor’s 

degrees in early childhood education. She then completed a California specific 

credentialing program to earn her multiple subjects teaching credential. It took her 

9 

two years to obtain her clear credential. Respondent has been employed as an 

elementary school teacher for many years, teaching kindergarten, fourth, fifth and 

eighth grades. She has never had any performance related issues or been disciplined. 

21. 

Respondent explained that the action taken by complainant against her 

credential is upsetting. She tried to explain to the Commission for several years that 

her decision to not get vaccinated or submit to testing was a deeply personal decision 

which is based on the belief that she has a constitutional right to not agree to take an 

experimental vaccine or release personal medical information. She believes the 

Supreme Court supports her belief by finding that vaccine and testing mandates were 

unconstitutional. Respondent would like to move past this issue. She plans to return to 

school to obtain her master’s degree in child psychology so she can help children who 

struggle with difficult family lives. 

CHARACTER EVIDENCE AND PERFORMANCE EVALUATIONS 

22. 

Respondent submitted a letter from Patricia Fortna, a teacher and 

colleague who taught with respondent at Butte Vista. She describes respondent as a 

“competent, caring, and knowledgeable teacher.” She supports respondent’s decision 

to maintain her medical privacy. 

23. 

Respondent also submitted her performance evaluation from Proximity 

Learning, which rated her as “Advanced” and “Proficient” in all evaluation areas. Her 

evaluation from Altus Early Childhood Center rated her as “effective” in all evaluation 

areas and described as an “excellent addition to Altus Public Schools.” 

10 

Analysis 

24. 

In Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, the California 

Supreme Court concluded that a teaching credential cannot be disciplined for 

unprofessional conduct, “unless that conduct indicates that the [educator] is unfit to 

teach.” (Id. at p. 229.) The Court outlined factors to consider when determining 

whether an educator’s conduct demonstrates unfitness to teach, which have been 

codified in California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80302, subdivision (a). The 

factors are: 

(1) the likelihood that the conduct may have adversely 

affected students or fellow teachers, and the degree of such 

adversity anticipated; 

(2) the proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct; 

(3) the types of credentials held or sought by the person 

involved; 

(4) any extenuating or aggravating circumstances 

surrounding the conduct; 

(5) the praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives 

resulting in the conduct; 

(6) the likelihood of recurrence of the questioned conduct; 

(7) the extent to which disciplinary action may have an 

adverse impact or chilling effect upon the constitutional 

rights of the person involved, or other teachers; and 

11 

(8) the publicity or notoriety given to the conduct. 

LIKELIHOOD OF ADVERSE EFFECTS ON STUDENTS OR FELLOW TEACHERS 

25. 

Complainant failed to demonstrate that respondent’s decision to not 

obtain a COVID-19 vaccine or submit to weekly testing had any adverse effect on 

students or fellow teachers at Butte Vista. Mr. Reed explained that when a teacher 

leaves the District it is “disruptive” but provided no specific examples of how 

respondent’s decisions were “disruptive” or caused any specific adverse effect. 

PROXIMITY OR REMOTENESS IN TIME 

26. 

Respondent’s conduct is remote in time. The District’s vaccine and 

testing mandate was issued in August 2021. By October 2021, respondent was placed 

on leave, and she resigned from the District in December 2021. It has been almost two 

years since the events which gave rise to her resignation. Since that time respondent 

has continued to work as a teacher. 

TYPE OF CREDENTIAL HELD  

27. 

Respondent holds a Clear Multiple Subject Teaching Credential, which 

requires teaching competence. 

EXTENUATING OR AGGRAVATING CIRCUMSTANCES 

28.  Neither the Education Code nor the applicable regulations specify what 

constitutes “extenuating circumstances.” However, California Code of Regulations, title 

5, section 80300, subdivision (m), defines “mitigating factor” as “an event or 

circumstance which demonstrates that the public, school children and the profession 

would be adequately protected by a more lenient degree of adverse action or no 

12 

adverse action whatsoever.” Respondent presented mitigating evidence regarding her 

belief that she had the right to assert her constitutional rights when deciding to not 

obtain the vaccine or submit to weekly testing. She attempted to work with the District 

to find a solution that would allow her to continue to teach at the District, such as 

working remotely, but the District denied her request. 

Respondent’s beliefs were further supported by the January 2022 Supreme 

Court’s decision that the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), 

a regulatory agency of the United States Department of Labor, did not have the 

authority to mandate that large businesses require their employees to either be 

vaccinated or be tested once a week for COVID-19. (See National Federation Of 

Independent Business, Et Al., v. Dept. Of Labor, Occupational Safety And Health 

Admin., et al. (2022) 142 S.Ct. 661.) 

29. 

California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80300, subdivision (b), lists 

aggravating factors, the presence of which indicate a greater degree of discipline is 

necessary to protect students and the teaching profession. These factors include, in 

pertinent part, whether: (1) the misconduct in question involved multiple wrongful 

acts; and (2) the misconduct significantly harmed the educational system. Respondent 

did not engage in multiple wrongful acts and complainant failed to establish that her 

conduct significantly harmed the educational system. 

PRAISEWORTHINESS OR BLAMEWORTHINESS OF MOTIVES RESULTING IN THE 

MISCONDUCT 

30. 

Respondent’s motives for her conduct was to assert what she believed 

were her constitutional rights, including the right to privacy. Her beliefs are clearly not 

13 

unfounded, since the Supreme Court recognized that employer mandates have 

constitutional limits. Her motives are more praiseworthy than blameworthy. 

LIKELIHOOD OF RECURRENCE 

31. 

The COVID-19 pandemic was unprecedented, as was the global response. 

Given that respondent has no history of performance related issues, there is scant 

likelihood of recurrence of the same or similar issues. 

ADVERSE IMPACT OR CHILLING EFFECT  

32. 

Respondent has the right to work for an employer who supports her 

beliefs and values. She ultimately elected to resign her position with the District. She 

immediately found employment as a teacher with a company that did not have vaccine 

or testing requirements. Discipline of respondent’s credential would likely adversely 

impact or chill respondent or other teachers’ decisions to exercise their constitutional 

rights. 

PUBLICITY OR NOTORIETY OF MISCONDUCT 

33.  No evidence was presented that respondent’s conduct was either 

publicized or notorious. 

CONCLUSION 

34. 

For the reasons stated above, and considering all the Morrison factors, 

complainant failed to establish by clear and convincing evidence that cause exists to 

discipline respondent. 

14 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

Burden of Proof 

1. 

Complainant has the burden of proving the allegations in the Accusation 

by clear and convincing evidence to a reasonable certainty. (Gardner v. Comm. on 

Professional Competence (1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035.) Clear and convincing evidence 

requires proof that is so clear as to leave no substantial doubt and that is sufficiently 

strong to command the unhesitating assent of every reasonable mind. (In re Marriage 

of Brooks (2008) 169 Cal.App.4th 176, 190.) 

Applicable Law 

2. 

Pursuant to the Education Code, commencing with section 44000, and 

California Code of Regulations, title 5, commencing with section 80000, the 

Commission is responsible for credentialing teachers in public schools in California, 

including issuing credentials and taking adverse action against applicants and 

credential holders. 

3. 

Education Code section 44421 provides in part:  

The Commission on Teacher Credentialing shall privately 

admonish, publicly reprove, revoke or suspend for immoral 

or unprofessional conduct, or for persistent defiance of, and 

refusal to obey, the laws regulating the duties of persons 

serving in the public school system, or for any cause that 

would have warranted the denial of an application for a 

credential or the renewal thereof, or for evident unfitness 

for service. 

15 

4. 

California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80300 states in part that: 

(a) “Adverse action” is a denial, a private admonition, public 

reproval, suspension or a revocation of one or more 

credentials. 

(b) “Aggravating factor” is an event or circumstance which 

demonstrates that a greater degree of adverse action for an 

act of professional misconduct is needed to adequately 

protect the public, schoolchildren or the profession. 

Aggravating factors may include, but are not limited to, the 

following: 

[¶] … [¶] 

(4) that the misconduct significantly harmed a child 

entrusted to the care of a credential holder or applicant, 

significantly harmed the public or the educational system; 

[¶] … [¶] 

5. 

California Code of Regulations, title 5, 80302, subdivision (a), provides 

the factors to consider to “determine the relationship between the alleged misconduct 

and the applicant’s or holder’s fitness, competence, or ability to effectively perform the 

duties authorized by the credential.” 

6. 

“Unprofessional conduct” includes “‘that which violates the rules of 

ethical code of a profession or such conduct which is unbecoming a member of a 

profession in good standing.’” (Bd. of Education of the City of Los Angeles v. Swan 

(1953) 41 Cal.2d 546, 553; quoting, 66 Corpus Juris, p. 55.) 

16 

Cause for Discipline 

7. 

As set forth in the Factual Findings as a whole, complainant failed to 

establish by clear and convincing evidence that respondent committed acts of 

unprofessional conduct. No cause exists to discipline respondent’s credential pursuant 

to Education Code section 44421. 

Conclusion 

8. 

When all the evidence is considered, complainant failed to prove that 

respondent engaged in unprofessional conduct. As a result, the Accusation must be 

dismissed.  

ORDER 

The Accusation filed against Brandee Grivois is DISMISSED. 

DATE: October 25, 2023

MARCIE LARSON 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings

17 

Marcie Larson (Oct 25, 2023 16:06 PDT)Marcie Larson 
 
