BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
In the Matter of the Accusation Against: 
JOHN ANDREW BELL, Respondent 
Agency Case No. 2-424025335 
OAH No. 2023100317 
PROPOSED DECISION 
Administrative Law Judge Coren D. Wong, Office of Administrative Hearings, 
State of California, heard this matter by videoconference on April 8, 2024, from 
Sacramento, California.
Phillip L. Arthur, Deputy Attorney General, represented complainant Mary Vixie 
Sandy, Ed.D., Executive Director of the California Commission on Teacher Credentialing 
(Commission), State of California.
Ernest H. Tuttle, III, of the law firm Tuttle & McCloskey, represented respondent 
John Andrew Bell, who appeared.
Evidence was received, the record closed, and the matter submitted for decision 
on April 8, 2024. A Protective Order Sealing Confidential Records protecting Witness 
1’s and Witness 2’s identities was issued at the conclusion of the hearing. A 2 Confidential Names List identifying Witness 1 and Witness 2 was included in the 
record as Exhibit 5 and sealed pursuant to the Protective Order.
FACTUAL FINDINGS 
Jurisdictional Matters 
1. The Commission issued respondent a certificate of clearance on August 
11, 2014. The certificate expired September 1, 2019, and has not been renewed. The 
expiration of a credential does not deprive the Commission of jurisdiction to discipline 
the credential. (Ed. Code, § 44440, subd. (b).) The term “credential” includes “a 
credential, certificate, life document, life diploma, permit, certificate of clearance, or 
waiver issued by the commission.” (Ed. Code, § 44002.) 
2. The Commission issued respondent an intern single subject teaching 
credential on August 3, 2015, which expired September 1, 2017, and has not been 
renewed. The Commission issued respondent a preliminary single subject teaching 
credential on June 7, 2016, which expired July 1, 2021, and has not been renewed. The 
Commission issued respondent a clear single subject teaching credential with an 
authorization in English on May 22, 2017. The credential expires June 1, 2027, unless 
renewed. 
3. Complainant authorized the filing of the Accusation on September 14, 
2023. The Accusation alleged cause to discipline respondent’s credentials because he 
demonstrated evident unfitness for service and committed acts of unprofessional 
conduct, immoral conduct, and conduct involving moral turpitude when he engaged in 
inappropriate sexual conversations with a high school student. 3 Respondent’s Background
4. Respondent grew up attending a conservative, non-denominational 
Christian church. His Christian upbringing played a big role in how he thought and 
acted. He was taught that strict abstinence prior to marriage was the “most God-
honoring” type of romantic relationship.
5. Respondent earned his bachelor’s degree in business from William 
Jessup University and began working for the County of Fresno. About the same time, 
he became active in his church and volunteered as a youth group leader for middle 
school and high school students. He later volunteered as a camp counselor for the 
church’s summer and winter camps. 
6. As a youth group leader, respondent was required to sign a code of 
conduct agreeing to abstain from consuming drugs and alcohol, even if he was of 
legal drinking age. He was encouraged to be open and accepting to openly 
homosexual youth, but to encourage any who were questioning their sexuality to 
follow the church’s teachings that marriage is only between a man and a woman. He 
was supposed to discourage any discussions about homosexuality. 
7. Respondent eventually found his job with the County of Fresno 
unfulfilling. However, he enjoyed working with students through his church and 
decided to become a teacher. He earned his teaching credential and master’s degree 
from Fresno Pacific University. 
8. Respondent’s first teaching job was with Sanger Unified School District
(District). He was assigned to teach 11th grade English at Sanger High School for the 
2015/2016 school year. He continued teaching English at the high school for the next 
five years, albeit at varying grade levels. The District placed respondent on 4 administrative leave during the 2021/2022 school year, and he resigned effective June 
30, 2022. 
9. The Fresno Unified School District hired respondent as a teacher for the 
2022/2023 school year. He was assigned to teach at Hamilton Elementary School. He 
currently teaches English at University High School, a free public charter high school 
currently authorized by the Fresno Unified School District. Respondent worked at both 
school sites without incident. 
Witness 1’s Complaint and the District’s Investigation
10. On November 5, 2021, Witness 1 filed a complaint against respondent 
with the District. Witness 1 was a senior at Sanger High School. He alleged respondent 
engaged him in sexually inappropriate conversations over the past year.
11. The District hired an independent investigator to investigate Witness 1’s 
complaint. The investigator concluded the preponderance of the evidence established 
respondent engaged in sexually inappropriate conversations with Witness 1. The 
conversations occurred online, via Instagram, and in person. 
Termination of Employment and Notice to the Commission 
12. After reviewing the investigator’s report, the District concluded 
respondent’s interactions with Witness 1 violated state and federal laws and District 
policies and regulations. On February 8, 2022, the District issued a Notice of Intent to 
Dismiss and Statement of Charges recommending respondent’s termination. He was 
immediately suspended without pay pending the outcome of the Notice of Intent. 
13. Respondent appealed the District’s Notice of Intent. The District 
requested an administrative hearing on the Notice of Intent. Prior to hearing, the 5 parties agreed to the terms of a settlement whereby respondent resigned from the 
District, effective June 30, 2022. The District’s governing board accepted his 
resignation the following month. 
14. The District immediately notified the Commission of respondent’s 
resignation. (See Ed. Code, § 44242.5, subd. (b)(3)(B) [the Commission must be notified
when a teacher resigns while allegations of misconduct are pending]; accord Cal. Code 
Regs., tit. 5, § 80303, subd. (a)(2).) The District included a copy of Witness 1’s complaint 
and the investigation report with its notice. 
Evidence at Hearing 
15. Complainant offered Witness 1’s and Dennis Wiechmann, Ed.D.’s, 
testimony at hearing. Dr. Wiechmann has been the District’s Superintendent since July 
1, 2023. Prior to that, he was its Assistant Superintendent, Human Resources. He 
notified the Commission of respondent’s resignation and included Witness 1’s 
complaint and the investigation report. 
16. Dr. Wiechmann met with respondent regarding Witness 1’s complaint. 
However, he did not recall the extent to which they discussed the substance of the 
complaint because it was being investigated by an outside investigator. He did recall 
respondent agreed he played video games with Witness 1 and denied anything 
untoward occurred while doing so.
17. Complainant did not call the investigator to testify at hearing or 
introduce his investigation report. Nor did she introduce Witness 1’s complaint. She
introduced Dr. Wiechmann’s notice to the Commission. 6 18. Respondent introduced correspondence he sent the Commission in 
response to Witness 1’s complaint and testified consistently with that correspondence. 
He also offered the testimony of one of his former students who was part of the online 
video game group and a character witness. He introduced his performance evaluations
for his first four years at Sanger High School and numerous character references.
WITNESS 1’S TESTIMONY
19. The 2020/2021 school year was Witness 1’s junior year at Sanger High 
School. Throughout the year, he played video games online with four boys who had 
already graduated from Sanger High School, including his older brother, Witness 2. 
The video games had a “chat” feature that allowed players to talk to one another in 
real time while playing games. 
20. Witness 1 never had respondent as a teacher. They first met “virtually” 
and got to know each other when he joined the online group to play video games 
“every so often.” Witness 1 learned during online chats respondent was engaged to be 
married. 
21. Witness 1 recalled respondent being uncharacteristically quiet during 
one of the gaming sessions in or around August 2021. Someone asked respondent 
what was wrong, and he explained he had recently ended his engagement because of 
“compatibility” issues with his former fiancée. He did not disclose any other reasons 
for ending his engagement.
22. Witness 1 also recalled respondent discussing his sex life during online 
chats. For instance, respondent said something about not being able to perform 
sexually. Witness 1 could not recall respondent’s specific words or any specific 7 performance issues respondent described. Respondent did not discuss any other 
inappropriate topics. 
23. However, Witness 1 also said respondent discussed being able to 
perform better sexually with men after ending his engagement, frequenting, Grindr, a 
social networking application for gay, bisexual, transgender, and queer people, and 
how sleeping with a lot of men made him feel like a “hoe.” Respondent mentioned 
sleeping around with several men and engaging in sexual acts, but not in graphic 
form. He described two specific homosexual sex acts and said one was “more gay” and 
caused him a lot more physical pressure than the other. 
24. Respondent maintained an Instagram account and added Witness 1 as a 
“friend.” Respondent was a bodybuilder and posted photographs and videos of 
himself at the gym flexing his muscles while wearing a Speedo swimsuit and no shirt. 
25. Respondent wanted to post a picture on his Instagram account for his 
30th birthday. He sent Witness 1 several photos of himself flexing his muscles and 
asked for help selecting one. Witness 1 provided his suggestion. On another occasion, 
Witness 1 asked respondent to send pictures of himself because Witness 1 liked 
drawing pictures of different people. Both times respondent sent the pictures via 
direct message through Instagram. 
26. Witness 1 visited respondent’s classroom and introduced himself at the 
beginning of the 2021/2022 school year. That was the first time they saw each other. 
About one week later, Witness 1 stopped by respondent’s classroom to see how he 
was doing. Respondent broke down crying and said he might be gay. Witness 1 tried 
consoling him. Witness 1 continued to stop by respondent’s classroom from time to 
time over the next several weeks. He would quickly ask how respondent was doing, or 8 respondent would give him a quick thumbs up or thumbs down, before Witness 1 
continued on his way. 
27. Witness 1 eventually concluded respondent’s comments about his sexual 
activities were inappropriate because he was a teacher and an adult and Witness 1 was 
a student and a minor. Witness 1 also believed it was inappropriate for respondent to 
have sent pictures through Instagram for the same reasons. When Witness 1 asked 
respondent to stop making inappropriate comments, respondent blamed him for 
introducing himself at the beginning of the year. 
RESPONDENT ’S CORRESPONDENCE AND TESTIMONY  
28. Respondent knew the older four members of the online video gaming 
group because they were former students of his from Sanger High School. In the 
spring of 2021, one of his former students invited him to join the online video game 
group. That was when he was first introduced to Witness 1. 
29. Respondent developed a close relationship with everyone in the online 
video game group. Everyone “followed” each other on Instagram, including 
respondent. He was engaged to be married in June 2021 when he joined the group, 
and he shared details of his pending nuptials during online chats. The members knew 
his fiancée’s name and what she looked like. They would regularly tease him about 
getting married and ask when they would receive their wedding invitations.
30. Respondent broke off his engagement in May 2021 because his mother 
was widowed nine months prior and was demanding a lot of his time, his mother and 
fiancée did not get along, he and his fiancée had financial issues, and they were not 
compatible sexually. Respondent grieved the termination of his engagement, and his 
grief apparently showed during a subsequent chat while playing video games with the 9 online video game group shortly thereafter. The others engaged in their typical banter 
about the pending wedding. Respondent became extremely emotional, broke down, 
and told them he had ended his relationship with his fiancée and called off the 
wedding. When asked why, he explained his fiancée’s and his parents did not get 
along, neither he nor his fiancée was certain about marriage, and there were “sexual 
issues” between them. He did not elaborate about what the sexual issues were, and no 
one asked. 
31. Respondent began attending therapy after breaking off his engagement. 
Through the therapeutic process, he began to question his sexuality. By the end of the 
summer of 2021, he concluded he is gay. This caused him to become very depressed 
and withdrawn out of fear and shame over a lifestyle he was taught was incompatible 
with his religious beliefs. Respondent was uncertain whether his family, work 
colleagues, and church family would continue to accept him. 
32. Witness 1 went to respondent’s classroom and introduced himself at the 
beginning of the 2021/2022 school year. That was the first time they met in person. 
Afterward, Witness 1 stopped by respondent’s classroom for casual, brief conversation
two or three times over the next few weeks. Students regularly went to respondent’s 
classroom to eat lunch and visit with him and others, and Witness 1 joined them once 
or twice. 
33. One day, Witness 1 walked by respondent’s classroom at the end of the 
school day, waved goodbye, and saw respondent crying through the window. He 
stopped, entered the room, and asked if respondent was okay. Respondent said he 
was not and explained, “I’m afraid I am gay. I don’t want to be gay. I think it’s wrong.” 
He also explained he feared disclosing his sexuality to others and being rejected by 
them. Witness 1 was extremely supportive and encouraging as he consoled 10 respondent and assured him everything would be okay. They each grabbed their 
belongings and went their separate ways. 
34. For the next few weeks, Witness 1 stopped by respondent’s classroom 
more frequently – at least once a week, if not every few days. The conversations were 
brief and casual. They mostly consisted of Witness 1 asking how respondent was doing 
or sharing what he was doing in drama class. 
35. Respondent gradually stopped talking to Witness 1 around the end of 
September or the beginning of October. Witness 1 stopped by respondent’s classroom 
when class was about to start or respondent needed to quickly attend to other 
business during a short break or lunch, so respondent was unable to visit with Witness 
1. Other times, Witness 1 would ask if respondent was doing better, and respondent 
would respond with a thumbs up or short answer. Eventually, Witness 1 stopped 
visiting respondent’s classroom altogether. 
36. Witness 1 later told respondent he had crossed the line when he tearfully 
told Witness 1 he is gay. Respondent agreed and apologized. Witness 1 also said he 
should not have been responsible for checking on respondent’s well-being afterward. 
Respondent apologized for Witness 1 feeling such a burden but explained he never 
expected or asked Witness 1 to check on him and Witness 1 voluntarily did so. Witness 
1 filed his complaint with the District shortly thereafter. 
37. Other than saying there were “sexual issues” between him and his 
fiancée, respondent denied engaging in any sexually inappropriate conversations with 
Witness 1. He further denied sending any pictures of himself to Witness 1. Although he 
admitted posting pictures of himself flexing his muscles on Instagram, he explained he 
was a weightlifter at the time and posted various pictures of him lifting weights. 11 38. Respondent further explained he would not have made any of the 
alleged comments about homosexuality because he did not admit his sexuality until 
the end of the summer of 2021. After, he struggled with accepting his sexuality 
because he feared his family’s, colleagues’, and church family’s reactions. 
39. Indeed, respondent was given the choice of attending counseling “to 
drop the gay lifestyle” or leave the church when he disclosed his sexuality to the youth 
pastor. He was told he could be reinstated as a youth group leader after he completed 
counseling, but he was banned from having any contact with the children in the 
meantime. 
40. Respondent explained his participation in the online video game group 
taught him numerous valuable lessons. He now recognizes he exercised poor 
judgment by joining a group unrelated to school that included a school-age member, 
even if that member was not one of his students. He also recognizes the position of 
authority teachers hold over students and how those lines can become blurred when 
the two groups interact more as “friends” than as “teacher v. student.” 
41. Respondent has developed an understanding of the need to keep his 
work life separate and apart from his personal life. He has come to recognize and 
understand why it is inappropriate to share personal, intimate details with students. 
Significantly, he understands the position of trust and authority teachers hold with 
students and the need to conduct himself around students in a manner that is beyond 
reproach. 
NOAH DURAN’S TESTIMONY
42. Noah Duran graduated from Sanger High School several years ago. 
Respondent was his English teacher his junior year. Mr. Duran described respondent as 12 “probably the best teacher” he ever had and one whom he felt actually cared about 
the students. 
43. Respondent currently acts as Mr. Duran’s “gym mentor” and provides 
various weightlifting tips. Mr. Duran estimated he currently communicates with 
respondent at least once a week when they see each other at the gym or exchange 
funny memes by text message. 
44. Mr. Duran said he developed a friendship with respondent his senior year 
of high school because he liked going to respondent’s classroom to play video games. 
He was part of the online video gaming group that included Witness 1 and 
respondent. He recalled respondent sharing with the group that respondent had called 
off his wedding. Respondent explained things were moving too fast with his fiancée 
and he learned he was gay. He did not say anything about being sexually incompatible 
with his fiancée. Respondent did not make any sexually inappropriate comments 
during that conversation or any others. He never disclosed information about his sex 
life, other than being gay.
SHANNON VIZCARRA’S TESTIMONY  
45. Shannon Vizcarra testified and wrote a character reference letter for 
respondent. She is in her 12th year of teaching English at Sanger High School. 
Respondent was assigned to Sanger High School at the beginning of her third year. 
They worked closely with each other and other members of their Professional Learning 
Community (PLC) – a group of educators who met regularly to share expertise and 
work collaboratively to improve teaching skills and students’ academic achievement. 
46. Ms. Vizcarra recalled respondent as a first-year teacher and described 
him as one who “came into this profession with the absolute best intentions” and 13 “truly had the intention of making the world a better place.” She explained “most 
teachers lose the rose-colored glasses by year three,” but respondent did not. She 
described him as never having lost his passion for teaching and never becoming 
cynical. She also said, “[Respondent] is the only teacher I’ve ever known that looks 
forward to summer break ending because he was excited to be back with students.”
47. Ms. Vizcarra ended her correspondence with the following:
I am somewhat aware of the matters, and the day that 
[respondent] was removed from the classroom was a sad 
day for us at Sanger High School. His students asked about 
him daily, and the teachers struggled in his absence – he 
was such an integral part of our PLC. [Respondent] has 
always held himself to the highest ethical and professional 
standard on campus, off-campus, and even at staff parties. 
He is truly a gift to the field of teaching and to the students 
past, present and future.
PERFORMANCE EVALUATIONS
48. Respondent’s performance evaluations confirmed the District hired him 
as a probationary certificated employee to teach 11th grade English at Sanger High 
School during the 2015/2016 school year. He continued in that assignment for at least 
his first four years with the District. He became a permanent certificated employee at 
the beginning of the 2017/2018 school year. 
49. Over the years, respondent showed continued improvement in his 
teaching skills and abilities. Each performance evaluation evaluated him under six 
standards – Standards 1 (Engaging and Supporting All Students in Learning), 2 14 (Creating and Maintaining Effective Environments for Student Learning), 3 
(Understanding and Organizing Subject Matter for Student Learning), 4 (Planning 
Instruction and Designing Learning Experiences for All Students), 5 (Assessing Student 
Learning), and 6 (Developing as a Professional Educator). Each Standard contained 
multiple sub-standards for which he received a rating of does not meet standard, 
meets the standard minimally, meets the standard, or exemplary implementation of 
standard. 
50. For his first year of teaching, respondent’s ratings for Standard 2 were all 
meets standard, except one was meets standard minimally. He received one more 
rating of meets standard than meets standard minimally for Standards 1, 5, and 6. He 
received mostly ratings of meets standard minimally with some ratings of meets 
standard for Standards 3 and 4. 
51. During respondent’s fourth year, all ratings were exemplary 
implementation of standard, except two were meets standard, for Standard 2. All 
ratings were meets standard for Standards 1, 4, and 5. All ratings for Standard 3 were 
meets standard, except one was exemplary implementation of standard. All ratings for 
Standard 6 were meets standard, except two were exemplary implementation of 
standard. 
CHARACTER REFERENCES
52. Respondent introduced six character references, including Ms. Vizcarra’s. 
Each author met respondent as a colleague at Sanger High School. Some 
acknowledged familiarity with this administrative proceeding, while others did not. All 
the authors spoke of respondent’s skills as a teacher in laudatory terms, particularly his 
ability to relate to, connect with, and motivate students.15 Analysis
CREDIBILITY OF WITNESSES
53. Complainant’s sole evidence of respondent’s alleged inappropriate sexual 
conversations with Witness 1 was Witness 1’s testimony. She did not call the 
investigator who investigated Witness 1’s complaint as a witness, and she did not 
introduce his investigation report or Witness 1’s complaint. Dr. Wiechmann included 
both documents with the notice of respondent’s termination he sent the Commission. 
Complainant’s failure to produce such evidence cast doubts over the credibility of 
Witness 1’s testimony. (See Evid. Code, § 412 [”If weaker and less satisfactory evidence 
is offered when it was within the power of the party to produce stronger and more 
satisfactory evidence, the evidence offered should be viewed with distrust”]; 
(1996) 43 Cal.App.4th 1525, 1537, fn. 11.) 
54. Additionally, Witness 1’s testimony was internally inconsistent and 
contradictory. For instance, he testified respondent mentioned his inability to perform 
sexually. Witness 1 could not recall respondent’s exact words or how he said he was 
unable to perform, but Witness 1 said respondent did not discuss any other 
inappropriate topics. However, he subsequently testified respondent explained he was 
able to perform better sexually with men after ending his engagement. Witness 1 also 
said respondent described his frequenting Grindr.
55. Witness 1 described respondent discussing his sexual involvement with 
several men, but not in graphic terms. Witness 1 later said respondent described two 
specific homosexual sex acts and said one was “more gay” and caused him more 
physical pressure than the other. Witness 1 also explained he believed it was 
inappropriate for respondent to have sent pictures through Instagram. However, 16 Witness 1 testified he asked respondent to send pictures because he enjoyed drawing 
pictures of different people. 
56. Lastly, the timing of Witness 1’s complaint was suspect. He introduced 
himself to respondent at the beginning of the 2021/2022 school year, occasionally 
visited respondent’s classroom over the following weeks, comforted and consoled 
respondent when he saw him distraught, and checked on respondent’s well-being 
thereafter. At the end of September or the beginning of October, Witness 1’s 
conversations with respondent lessened and eventually stopped. He then confronted 
respondent about it being inappropriate for respondent to have placed on Witness 1 
the responsibility of checking on respondent’s well-being. Respondent denied giving 
Witness 1 that responsibility and stated Witness 1 voluntarily took that responsibility 
without having been asked. Witness 1 filed his complaint shortly thereafter. 
57. On the other hand, respondent testified consistently with 
correspondence he previously sent the Commission. He readily admitted making a 
mistake by explaining he broke off his engagement because there were “sexual issues” 
between his fiancée and him. Respondent’s testimony that he did not engage in 
inappropriate sexual conversations with Witness 1 was corroborated by Mr. Duran’s 
testimony. 
58. Complainant introduced Dr. Wiechmann’s notice as a business record. 
Such evidence was competent to prove only the: (1) fact of respondent’s resignation 
(2) dates on which he resigned and the District’s governing board accepted his 
resignation; (3) events which led to his resignation; and (4) District’s notice to the 
Commission. (Evid. Code, § 1271 [a business record documenting “an act, condition, or 
event is not . . . inadmissible . . . hearsay when offered to prove the act, condition, or 
event”].) Significantly, the notice was incompetent evidence of the truth of the events 17 which led to respondent’s resignation. ( (1993) 4 Cal.4th 1233, 
1295, fn. 36 [court records are admissible business records of the occurrence of events 
documented therein, but not as evidence of the truth of events documented]; 
(1974) 12 Cal.3d 486, 503 [the truth of a psychiatrist’s conclusion in his report 
was not “an act, condition, or event” under Evid. Code, § 1271].) 
59. For the reasons explained above, respondent’s testimony was more 
credible and persuasive than Witness 1’s. Any discrepancies between their testimony 
were resolved in favor of respondent’s. 
ALLEGED MISCONDUCT
60. Complainant alleged cause existed to discipline respondent’s credentials 
because he demonstrated evident unfitness for service and committed acts of 
unprofessional conduct, immoral conduct, and involving moral turpitude when he 
engaged in inappropriate sexual conversations with Witness 1. She failed to prove any 
of the allegations by clear and convincing evidence. 
61. Although Witness 1 testified about respondent’s alleged misconduct, 
respondent denied each allegation. His denials of wrongdoing were more credible and 
persuasive than Witness 1’s testimony to the contrary. Therefore, no cause exists to 
discipline respondent’s credentials.
LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 
Applicable Burden/Standard of Proof 
1. Complainant has the burden of proving the grounds for discipline 
alleged in the Accusation by clear and convincing evidence to a reasonable certainty. 18 ( (1983) 33 Cal.3d 532, 536 [an administrative agency 
seeking to discipline a license has the burden of proving the grounds for discipline 
alleged in the accusation]; see  (1985) 
164 Cal.App.3d 1036, 1039–1040 [recognizing that the clear and convincing evidence 
standard applies to disciplining a teaching credential].) “The courts have defined clear 
and convincing evidence as evidence which is so clear as to leave no substantial doubt 
and as sufficiently strong to command the unhesitating assent of every reasonable 
mind [citations]. It has been said that a preponderance calls for probability, while clear 
and convincing proof demands a [citations].” ( (1978) 83 
Cal.App.3d 890, 899; italics original.) 
Applicable Law 
2. The California Supreme Court has recognized that the terms “immoral 
conduct” and “unprofessional conduct” substantially overlap one another and that 
conduct which constitutes one, often includes the other. (See 
(1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 221, fn. 9.) “Unprofessional conduct” includes “’that 
which violates the rules or ethical code of a profession or such conduct which is 
unbecoming a member of a profession in good standing.’” (
 (1953) 41 Cal.2d 546, 553, quoting 66 Corpus Juris, p. 55.) 
In describing what constitutes “immoral conduct” within the context of the Education 
Code, the court in 
(1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, said: 
In , 36 Cal.2d 734, at page 
740 [227 P.2d 449], the Supreme Court quotes with 
approval the following statement from Words and Phrases, 
permanent edition, volume 20, pages 159-160: “The term 19 ‘immoral’ has been defined generally as that which is hostile 
to the welfare of the general public and contrary to good 
morals. Immorality has not been confined to sexual matters, 
but includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or 
indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; 
or as willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral 
indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the 
community, and as an inconsiderate attitude toward good 
order and the public welfare.”
3. The court in 
(2011) 194 Cal.App.4th 1454, said the following about the definition of 
immoral or unprofessional conduct:
Moreover, the definition of immoral or unprofessional 
conduct must be considered in conjunction with the unique 
position of public school teachers, upon whom are imposed 
“responsibilities and limitations on freedom of action which 
do not exist in regard to other callings.” [Citation.]
(., at p. 1466.) 
4. And while “conduct constituting ‘evident unfitness for service’ will often 
constitute ‘unprofessional conduct[,]’ . . . the converse is not true.” (
(1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 
1445.) “’Evident unfitness for service’ requires that unfitness for service be attributable 
to a defect in temperament — a requirement not necessary for a finding of 
‘unprofessional conduct.’” ( .) 20 5. The following has been said about the analysis for determining whether 
conduct constitutes sufficient cause for taking adverse action against a credential: 
, 66 Cal.App. 157, 168 [225 
P. 783], quoted in , 41 Cal.2d 
546, 553-554 [261 P.2d 261], found that the standards for 
judging the propriety of a teacher’s conduct, and the extent 
to which that conduct may be the basis for the revocation 
of a credential, involves many aspects. “. . . . the teacher is 
entrusted with the custody of children and their high 
preparation for useful life. His habits, his speech, his good 
name, his cleanliness, the wisdom and propriety of his 
unofficial utterances, his associations, all are involved. His 
ability to inspire children and to govern them, his power as 
a teacher, and the character for which he stands are matters 
of major concern in a teacher’s selection and retention.” 
(  (1972) 22 Cal.App.3d 988, 991.) 
Grounds for Discipline
6. The Commission shall discipline a credential “for immoral or 
unprofessional conduct . . . , or for any cause that would have warranted the denial of 
an application for a credential or the renewal thereof, or for evident unfitness for 
service.” (Ed. Code, § 44421.) An application for a credential or to renew a credential 
may be denied for acts of moral turpitude. (Ed. Code, § 44345, subd. (e).)21 Conclusion
7. Complainant did not prove any of the misconduct alleged in the 
Accusation by clear and convincing evidence. Therefore, no cause exists to discipline 
respondent’s credentials, and the Accusation should be dismissed. 
ORDER 
The September 14, 2023 Accusation filed against respondent John Andrew Bell 
is DISMISSED. 
DATE: May 3, 2024
COREN D. WONG
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings