BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
In the Matter of the Accusation Against: 
REBECCA PLAUD, Respondent 
Agency Case No. 2-407288778 
OAH No. 2023110183 
PROPOSED DECISION 
Administrative Law Judge Coren D. Wong, Office of Administrative Hearings, 
State of California, heard this matter by telephone and videoconference on March 4, 
2024, from Sacramento, California.
Jeff Stone, Deputy Attorney General, represented complainant Mary Vixie 
Sandy, Ed.D., Executive Director of the California Commission on Teacher Credentialing 
(Commission), State of California. 
Respondent Rebecca Plaud represented herself and appeared by telephone.
Evidence was received, and the record was left open to allow: (1) respondent to 
produce documentary evidence; and (2) complainant to respond to such evidence and 
request further cross-examination of respondent if necessary. Respondent’s evidence 
was received and marked as Exhibits A through C. Complainant’s response agreeing 
Exhibits A through C may be admitted as administrative hearsay and declining the 2 opportunity to conduct further cross-examination of respondent was marked and 
admitted as Exhibit 11. Exhibits A through C were admitted as administrative hearsay. 
The record was closed and the matter submitted for decision on March 22, 
2024. 
FACTUAL FINDINGS 
Jurisdictional Matters 
1. The Commission issued respondent a certificate of clearance on April 25, 
2008. The certificate expired May 1, 2013. The term “credential” includes “a credential, 
certificate, life document, life diploma, permit, certificate of clearance, or waiver issued 
by the [C]ommission.” (Ed. Code, § 44002.) The expiration of a credential does not 
deprive the Commission of jurisdiction to discipline the credential. (Ed. Code, § 44440, 
subd. (b).)
2. The Commission issued respondent an emergency 30-day substitute 
teaching permit on September 11, 2009. The permit was reissued three times, and the 
last one expired April 1, 2014.
3. The Commission issued respondent a child development site supervisor 
permit on December 22, 2010. The permit was reissued twice, and the most recent one 
expires May 1, 2026.
4. The Commission issued respondent a preliminary education specialist 
instruction credential on July 9, 2013. The credential expired August 1, 2018, but the 
Commission issued him a clear education specialist instruction credential on June 1, 
2018. The clear credential was reissued and expires July 1, 2028.3 San Joaquin County Office of Education’s Job Announcement
5. On August 17, 2021, the San Joaquin County Office of Education (SJCOE) 
posted a job announcement for a position as a preschool autism teacher in SJCOE’s 
Special Education Department on EdJoin. EdJoin is a website the California County 
Superintendents Educational Services Association sponsors, which provides 
information about job fairs and allows users to apply for teaching and other 
education-related jobs online. 
6. The job announcement identified the start date for the position as 
“2021/2022 School Year.” It identified the length of the work year as “183 Workdays, 
Full Time, Monday - Friday.” The location for the position was “Site to be determined.”
The announcement included the following job summary:
Under supervision of Special Education Program 
Administrator, will provide quality education to severely 
handicapped students, ages 18 months to 22 years, through 
a commitment to team participation in planning and 
implementation of student programs, a functional,
community based curriculum; communication and social 
skill development; interagency cooperation; and a strong 
parent-teacher-student linkage. Opportunities exist to 
develop and experiment with adaptive technology, 
vocational education, and integration with non-
handicapped populations. Does related work as required. 
Note: This list of essential functions and physical 
requirements is not exhaustive and may be supplemented 4 as necessary in accordance with the requirements of the 
job. The San Joaquin County Office of Education adheres to 
the provisions of ADA regarding reasonable 
accommodation procedures. 
Respondent’s Job Application, Job Offer, and Acceptance
7. Respondent applied for the position identified in SJCOE’s August 17, 
2021 job announcement and was granted an interview. On December 13, 2021, SJCOE 
prepared an Intent to Employ offering respondent a teaching position in the Special 
Education Department, commencing January 3, 2022. It identified her employment 
status as probationary and specified the range/class and step on the salary schedule 
being offered. 
8. Respondent accepted SJCOE’s job offer the following day by signing and 
returning the Intent to Employ. By doing so, she acknowledged the following 
statement: 
I understand this offer is contingent upon final background 
check, fingerprint clearance, attendance at the New Hire 
Orientation and verification of appropriate teaching 
credential. I accept the position offered above under the 
terms and conditions of the rules, regulations, and salary 
schedule of the San Joaquin County Office of Education.
9. Respondent started her new position on January 3, 2022. That was 
confirmed by January 21, 2022 correspondence from County Superintendent of 
Schools Troy Brown, Ed.D., welcoming her “ to the SJCOE Team .” (Emphasis original.)5 Her employment contract was not sent to her until April 4, 2022, due to unforeseen 
delays. Respondent never signed a copy of her contract.
Non-Reelection for the 2022/2023 School Year 
10. Dr. Brown decided not to reelect respondent for a teaching position with 
SJCOE for the 2022/2023 school year. On May 4, 2022, he drafted a notice of non-
reelection informing respondent her “employment with the San Joaquin County Office 
of Education will be terminated at the end of [her] contract period, May 27, 2022.” 
11. In the past, notices of non-reelection were hand-delivered to the affected 
employees. However, SJCOE was still working under COVID-19 protocols on May 4, 
2022, so Christina Torres-Peters, SJCOE’s Chief Human Resources Officer, and Monica 
Vallerga, SJCOE’s Division Director of Special Education, met with respondent by 
videoconference. Ms. Torres-Peters shared her screen and displayed Dr. Brown’s notice 
of non-reelection. She told respondent she was expected to fulfill the remainder of her 
contract. 
12. Respondent did not ask any questions or raise any concerns during the 
meeting. Ms. Torres-Peters sent the notice of non-reelection to respondent by U.S. 
Mail and email after the meeting. 
Respondent’s Job Abandonment 
13. On the night of May 4, 2022, respondent sent an email to Aggie 
Christensen and Shelly Garrett, employees in SJCOE’s human resources and special 
education departments, respectively. She wrote:
I was informed today by HR that I will not be offered a 
contract for the next school year. Which consequently omits 6 me from working ESY. It is for this reason as well as many 
others that I have decided that today is my last day working 
for SJCOE. I have taken all of my personal belongings out of 
the classroom and have left the school laptop and keys in 
the desk drawer. I will not be accessing my sjcoe email so 
any emails can be sent here at my personal email account I 
can also be reached at [omitted].
(Grammar and punctuation original.)
14. Ms. Torres-Peters arrived at work the following morning, and Ms. 
Christensen immediately told her about the email respondent sent the night before. 
Ms. Torres-Peters interpreted the email as constituting respondent’s resignation, but 
she wanted to speak with respondent because respondent had not contacted her 
directly. Therefore, Ms. Torres-Peters asked her assistant to contact respondent and 
confirm she understood the consequences of her resignation. 
15. Ms. Torres-Peters did not hear from respondent, so she sent the 
following email the next week: 
Please find the letter Monica Vallerga and I reviewed on 
Zoom last week related to your probationary release. As we 
discussed, you were expected to fulfill the term of your 
contract through May 27, 2022. You did not indicate an 
intent to not fulfill this term during our conversation on 
May 4, 2022. 
You subsequently emailed Aggie Christensen and Shelly 
Garrett on May 5th [ ] advising them that you were not 7 returning to work. I advised Jennifer Barry on May 6, 2022 
of your failure to fulfill your contract and the obligation of 
SJCOE to report this to the Commission on Teacher 
Credentialing.
SJCOE is willing to allow you to return to work the [ ] fulfill 
the term of your contract and to avoid negative reporting 
to the CTC. As you know, there are a number of triennials 
and kinder eligibility that still need to occur. If you are 
willing to return to the classroom starting tomorrow, I will 
need to know by 5:00 p.m. today. Failure to respond will 
result in ceasing of pay for the remainder of the term of 
your contract and reporting to the CTC for failure to fulfill 
your contract. 
16. Respondent responded the following afternoon, “I am working with 
union representatives.” Ms. Torres-Peters immediately responded by explaining, “The 
deadline was yesterday.” However, she extended the deadline to 5:00 p.m. that 
afternoon. Respondent missed that deadline, and Ms. Torres-Peters granted one more 
extension.
17. Respondent sent Ms. Torres-Peters the following email on May 14, 2022:
I had asked her for (via text) contact info for CTA rep and 
she said she would let Gina Parish know to contact me. I 
never heard from Gina. I just feel mishandled by everyone. 
The March deadline to inform me of whether I would 
receive a contract was not adhere [ ] to. Although I 8 expressed an interest in joining the union I was never given 
the paperwork to do so. I never had the classroom support 
required but did my best to keep on top of everything while 
learning the program. From my perspective I feel there was 
never any intention of offering me a contract. I am 
expendable. I feel like everyone gets to drop the ball but 
me. I will come back if offered a (chance) contract for next 
year otherwise I am resigning.
(Punctuation original.) 
18. Ms. Torres-Peters responded to respondent’s email by explaining she 
would receive a document acknowledging she resigned her position, effective May 5, 
2022. Ms. Torres-Peters asked respondent to sign and return the document upon 
receipt. Respondent refused to sign and return the document. 
SJCOE’s Complaint to the Commission and Subsequent Investigation 
19. Ms. Torres-Peters completed a Notification of Credential Holder’s 
Change in Employment Status Due to Allegations of Misconduct (Notification) and 
submitted it to the Commission on June 24, 2022. She included correspondence 
outlining respondent’s employment and job abandonment.
20. The Committee of Credentials (Committee) opened an investigation into
respondent’s employment with SJCOE. As part of its investigation, the Committee 
provided respondent an opportunity to respond to the Notification. She wrote:
I am writing in response to the allegations made by the San 
Joaquin County Office of Education (SJCOE) in which they 9 stated that on May 14th, 2022 I resigned from my position 
as teacher and abandoned my contract with them without 
good cause and without consent. 
I did not resign on May 14th, my last day of work at SJCOE 
was on May 4th. On May 4th I attended an on-line zoom 
meeting with Christina Torres-Peters and Monica Vallegra in 
which I was notified that I would not be given a teaching 
contract for the 2022-2023 school year. I was also given a 
Notice of Non-Reelection dated 5/4/2022, via e-mail 
(enclosed). I felt really defeated, coupled with the 
extenuating circumstances occurring in my classroom I 
informed my supervisor that I would not be returning to the 
classroom. The classroom environment was causing myself 
excess stress and anxiety and making it a challenge to 
provide a safe and productive environment for my students. 
There was also a misrepresentation of the Para-professional 
support I would have in the classroom. I discussed some of 
these items with union representative, Jennifer Barry, when 
she contacted me after I invoked my Weingarten rights. 
There were a few exchanges of e-mails between myself, 
Jennifer and various administration. I then learned from 
Jennifer that I could not be represented by the union. I did 
not know how to proceed and navigate my situation, I also 
did not want to be coerced into signing a resignation letter 
that was eventually written for me by the administration 10(Christina/Monica). (I have retained all text messages and e-
mails).
*In regards to my Weingarten rights and union support, I 
was not presented in a timely matter by SJCOE with 
documents to join the union upon hire. Upon invoking my 
Weingarten rights, Jennifer Barry the union representative 
contacted me regarding the meeting with Christina and 
Monica. During our conversation Jennifer said that she 
would refer me to “legal” because they can force SJCOE to 
give me a contract for the 2022-2023 school year because 
they did not meet “the March deadline” to inform me that I 
would not be reelected. Attached to the Non-Reelection 
letter that I was given by HR, was a copy of Ed Code 
44929.21, which did not seem to match what Jennifer stated 
about the March deadline so I was a bit confused. Jennifer 
asked for copies of new hire documents so I took pictures 
of contract documents with my phone and text them to her. 
Later, Jennifer text me to let me know that “legal” said 
because I was not a dues paying union member they could 
not represent me. I told Jennifer that at my new hire 
orientation there were no union documents presented to 
me to join the union or to have union dues deducted from 
my paycheck. At my new hire orientation I was told by 
Priscilla Fernandez that a union representative would 
contact me. I was never given the paperwork to join even 
after inquiring about it with HR more than once. Also I was 11under the assumption that I was automatically covered by 
the union because the 2021-2022 Teacher Salary Schedule 
states, “Employees paid on this Salary Schedule are 
represented by San Joaquin Educators Association-
California Teachers Association” (enclosed). Also, the Edjoin 
job description posted on 8/17/2021 states, “This position is 
represented by the California Teachers Association” 
(enclosed). After all the confusion I asked Jennifer to have 
the CTA representative contact me. Jennifer said she would 
have Gina Parish contact me. I never heard from Gina and 
or Jennifer from then on. No one from the union had 
contacted me and Jennifer did not respond to the last texts 
and email messages that I sent to her on 5/17/2022 
(enclosed). Jennifer advise me that it was my choice 
whether to go back to the classroom and finish out the 
remainder of the school year but with the breakdown in 
communication, my questions and concerns about the 
conditions of the classroom as well as questions regarding 
the teaching contract were left unanswered.
*In regards to the extenuating circumstance, There were 
many extenuating circumstances that were happening in 
the classroom which guided my decision to not return to 
the classroom. All of which my immediate supervisor, 
Shelley Garrett (previously Rowena Fairbanks) was aware of 
because throughout the four months I was employed I 
made almost daily requests for classroom support. I was 12constantly calling and e-mailing Teresa and Kelley at HR for 
substitute para-professionals due to the high absence rate 
of the existing para professionals on a daily basis, and 
absences due to COVID quarantining. I was supposed to 
have four para professionals but most days had only two for 
a moderate/severe Autism classroom of about 11 children, 
some of which needed one-on-one attention to keep them 
safe and engaged. Also I had put in multiple requests 
through the Help Desk system, to repair or replace my 
classroom phone because it did not work properly so I was 
having to use my personal cell phone to call parents and 
make other phone calls throughout the day as needed. I 
could not even use the teacher next door, Mona Pentoja’s, 
phone because her classroom phone did not work either. 
There was also a cockroach problem of which I also put in a 
request through the Help Desk system to have something 
done about it. These were the daily issues I confronted but 
there were many others. 
*Lastly, in regards to the contract for the 2021-2022 school 
year, in which I thought I was working under, I was not 
presented with it in a timely manner. When I did receive it 
sometime in April I did not sign and submit it to HR, which 
put me in the position of being employed under a contract 
without a definitive term. (enclosed are unassigned contract 
as well as other documents with differing dates, that came 
along with it by US Mail in April). I felt that the implied basic 13expectations of an employee contract to include properly 
working equipment, sufficient Para-professional support 
and a hygienic environment had not been met. Fearing for 
my credential and my livelihood and without union support 
I consulted with a friend, who is a lawyer, about my 
situation. The takeaway from the discussion led me to 
inform the County Superintendent of Schools, Troy A. 
Brown, in writing about a few details of my situation. 
(enclosed are a copy of the letter and his e-mail response)
Had I been given a contract for the 2022-2023 school year I 
would have accepted it even with all the issues because I 
felt I had laid down the foundation for making things better 
for the students and adults in that classroom by not being 
complaisant. All complaints made by email, request via Help 
Desk, as well as my phone records can all be verified. I may 
even have gone back to the classroom had my concerns 
been addresses in a timely manner. 
*This letter of explanation is not exhaustive of everything 
that occurred the situation.
I declare under penalty of perjury under the laws of the 
State of California that the foregoing is true and correct. 
*In closing I am requesting in writing that the Committee 
provide me a [ ] with a copy of the information in my file 
that constitutes the basis of the allegations under review.14(Grammar, punctuation, and spelling original.)
21. The Committee held a meeting from December 14 through 16, 2022, to 
discuss its investigation, after which it determined probable cause existed to 
recommend that the Commission suspend respondent’s credentials for 30 days. The 
Committee notified respondent of its recommendation and advised her of her rights 
to request reconsideration and/or an administrative hearing challenging the 
recommendation.
22. Respondent asked the Committee to reconsider its recommendation. She 
explained, in part, “Even more importantly suspension of my credentials would leave 
my classroom without a teacher which would ‘cause harm to the educational system’, 
and my ‘students would be harmed’ and ‘would have an impact on daily instruction’ 
(current circumstances in aggravation).” If the Committee did not reconsider its 
recommendation, respondent requested an administrative hearing.
23. Respondent’s request for reconsideration was denied “because [she] 
failed to provide new and relevant information.” On August 2, 2023, complainant 
signed the Accusation solely in her official capacity. The Accusation alleges a single 
ground for disciplining respondent’s credentials: her failure to fulfill her employment 
contract with SJCOE without good cause. 
Respondent’s Evidence 
EXHIBITS
24. Respondent introduced a copy of Dr. Brown’s correspondence notifying 
her that SJCOE accepted her “letter of resignation effective May 5, 2022.” She also 
produced a copy of her June 14, 2022 email forwarding her letter to Dr. Brown and his 15acknowledgment. The letter shared some of her concerns with her former working 
conditions and concluded, “Since I was not employed under a contract with a 
definitive term, any negative report to the California Commission on Teacher 
Credentialing would be defamatory and I will pursue legal action.” 
TESTIMONY
25. Respondent testified consistently with her emails to SJCOE and written 
response to the Committee. Additionally, she argued the Commission has no 
jurisdiction to suspend her credentials for more than 30 days because that was all the 
Committee recommended. She further argued she was not employed under an 
“official” contract because she never signed the one sent her, and she did not 
“officially” resign from SJCOE because she never signed the document acknowledging 
her resignation that SCOE sent her. 
Analysis 
CAUSE FOR DISCIPLINE
26. The clear and convincing evidence established that on December 14, 
2021, respondent accepted SJCOE’s offer of employment as a teacher in the Special 
Education Department, commencing January 3, 2022. The employment contract 
provided to respondent three months later clarified her employment was for the 
remainder of the 2021/2022 school year.
27. On May 4, 2022, respondent was given notice of her non-reelection as a 
teacher for the 2022/2023 school year. Dr. Brown’s notice specified her “employment 
with the San Joaquin County Office of Education will be terminated at the end of [her] 
contract, May 27, 2022.” During the meeting at which Ms. Torres-Peters notified 16respondent of her non-reelection, she also explained respondent was “expected to 
fulfill the term of [her] contract through May 27, 2022.” 
28. Nonetheless, respondent abandoned her position when she sent Ms. 
Christensen and Ms. Garrett an email explaining “that I have decided that [May 4, 
2022] is my last day working for SJCOE.” Ms. Torres-Peters provided respondent 
numerous opportunities to withdraw her letter of resignation and fulfill her remaining 
duties under her employment contract, but she refused absent SJCOE offering her an 
employment contract for the 2022/2023 school year. Dr. Brown begrudgingly accepted 
respondent’s letter of resignation effective May 5, 2022.
29. The was no evidence respondent accepted SJCOE’s offer of employment 
conditioned on her: (1) becoming a member of the teachers’ union; (2) being provided 
a certain level of paraprofessional support in the classroom; or (3) being provided a 
certain classroom environment. Additionally, her failure to apply for union 
membership and pay monthly dues, the shortage of paraprofessionals during the 
COVID-19 pandemic, and her classroom environment did not constitute good cause 
for abandoning her students and leaving them without a regular teacher with more 
than three weeks remaining in the 2021/2022 school year. Further, any contention that 
respondent’s working conditions were so poor as to constitute good cause for 
breaching her contract was belied by her offer to return to the classroom if offered 
employment for the 2022/2023 school year. 
30. Respondent’s argument that she did not “officially” resign from SJCOE 
because she did not sign the document confirming her resignation SJCOE had sent 
was nonsensical. She explained to the Committee, “[M]y last day of work at SJCOE was 
on May 4th” and “I informed my supervisor that I would not be returning to the 
classroom.” Similarly, SJCOE’s belated presentation of respondent’s employment 17contract and her refusal to sign it were inconsequential. Respondent accepted SJCOE’s 
job offer on December 14, 2021. She began working January 3, 2022. 
FITNESS TO TEACH 
31. The Commission may take adverse action against a credential only when 
the underlying conduct demonstrates an unfitness to teach. (See 
 (2010) 184 Cal.App.4th 462, 473.) The California Supreme 
Court has delineated factors for determining whether misconduct demonstrates an 
unfitness to teach. (See (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 229–
230 [analyzing former Ed. Code, § 13202, predecessor to Ed. Code, § 44421].) The 
Commission adopted the  factors by enacting California Code of Regulations, 
title 5, section 80302. “Only the pertinent factors need to be analyzed.” 
(, , 184 Cal.App.4th at p. 476.)
Likelihood of Adverse Effect 
32. Respondent abandoned her job with more than three weeks remaining in 
the 2021/2022 school year. By doing so, she failed some of society’s most vulnerable 
students, those with severe disabilities, including Autism Spectrum Disorder. Though 
SJCOE likely found a substitute teacher, or multiple ones, to take respondent’s place in 
the classroom, she deprived her students of the familiarity and rapport they had 
developed with each other over more than four months. Respondent’s abandonment 
of her students likely had an adverse impact on them. (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80302, 
subd. (a)(1) [likelihood of adverse effect on student is a factor for evaluating fitness to 
teach]; see , , 184 Cal.App.4th at p. 477 [the applicable criterion 
analyzes the likelihood of, not the actual, adverse impact].) 18Proximity or Remoteness in Time
33. “The proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct” in question is 
another factor for evaluating respondent’s fitness to teach. (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, 
§ 80302, subd. (a)(2).) Respondent abandoned her job with SJCOE during the 
2021/2022 school year, only two years ago. ( , , 184 Cal.App.4th at p. 477 
[misconduct that occurred six years before the administrative hearing “was not remote 
in time”].)
Praiseworthiness or Blameworthiness
34. “The praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the 
conduct” is another factor for evaluating respondent’s fitness to teach. (Cal. Code 
Regs., tit. 5, § 80302, subd. (a)(5).) Although respondent denied abandoning her job, 
she attributed her misconduct to general job dissatisfaction. But regardless of her 
working conditions, she was not justified in abandoning her students with special 
needs.
Likelihood of Recurrence 
35. The likelihood respondent will engage in similar misconduct is another 
factor for evaluating her fitness to teach. (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80302, subd. (a)(6).) 
Respondent demonstrated no insight into her misconduct. She claimed she did not 
abandon her job because she never worked under an “official” contract and she did 
not “officially” resign from SJCOE. Such claims were belied by the credible evidence 
establishing otherwise. 
36. Additionally, respondent argued to the Committee, “Even more 
importantly suspension of my credentials would leave my classroom without a teacher 19which would ‘cause harm to the educational system’, and my ‘students would be 
harmed’ and ‘would have an impact on daily instruction.’” She did not consider the fact 
that abandoning her job would have the same effects. 
37. In sum, respondent’s conduct and attitude demonstrated there is a great 
likelihood of recurrence. (See 
(1989) 49 Cal.3d 933, 940 [“Fully acknowledging the wrongfulness of his actions is an 
essential step towards rehabilitation”]; see also (2012) 211 Cal.App.4th 
141, 149 [describing a change in attitude as “[a]rguably the most important in 
predicting future conduct . . .”].) 
Adverse Impact or Chilling Effect 
38. “The extent to which disciplinary action may inflict an adverse impact or 
chilling effect upon the constitutional rights of the person involved, or other certified 
persons,” is another factor for evaluating respondent’s fitness to teach. (Cal. Code 
Regs., tit. 5, § 80302, subd. (a)(7).) A public school teacher has no constitutional right to 
employment, and her conduct is subject to reasonable supervision and restriction to 
ensure it does not negatively impact her performance or the teaching profession. (
(1953) 41 Cal.2d 546, 556, overruled on 
different grounds by  (1972) 6 Cal.3d 
575, 587, fn. 7 [the executive power to hire and fire is not absolute].) Disciplining a 
teacher’s credentials because she abandoned her special needs students with more 
than three weeks remaining in the school year would not adversely impact or have a 
chilling effect on her constitutional rights. 20LEGAL CONCLUSIONS
Applicable Burden/Standard of Proof 
1. Complainant has the burden of proving the grounds for discipline 
alleged in the Accusation by clear and convincing evidence to a reasonable certainty. 
( (1983) 33 Cal.3d 532, 536 [an administrative agency 
seeking to discipline a license has the burden of proving the grounds for discipline 
alleged in the accusation]; see (1985) 
164 Cal.App.3d 1036, 1039–1040 [recognizing that the clear and convincing evidence 
standard applies to disciplining a teaching credential].) “The courts have defined clear 
and convincing evidence as evidence which is so clear as to leave no substantial doubt 
and as sufficiently strong to command the unhesitating assent of every reasonable 
mind [citations]. It has been said that a preponderance calls for probability, while clear 
and convincing proof demands a [citations].” ( . (1978) 83 
Cal.App.3d 890, 899; italics original.) 
Applicable Law 
EMPLOYMENT OF CERTIFICATED EMPLOYEES
2. A certificated employee is either “permanent” or “probationary.” (
 (1999) 70 Cal.App.4th 87, 93.) Permanent employees 
have tenure and may be dismissed only for cause after a hearing. ( .) “Probationary 
teachers have no vested right to be rehired for the next school year.” ( ., at p. 94.) 
Except for separations from employment not relevant here, a probationary employee 
may be non-reelected for the following school year for “any lawful reason regardless 
of the sufficiency of the cause.” ( .; 21(1991) 228 Cal.App.3d 805, 808 [“Probationary 
employees may be nonreelected without any showing of cause, without any statement 
of reasons, and without any right of appeal or administrative redress”].) 
3. A certificated employee who obtained probationary status during the 
1983/1984 school year or later and worked for the school district “for two complete 
consecutive school years in a position or positions requiring certification 
qualifications” becomes a permanent employee of the district at the beginning of the 
third if reelected for that year “to a position requiring certification qualifications.” (Ed. 
Code, § 44929.21, subd. (b).) Such employee must be notified of her reelection or non-
reelection to a position or positions requiring certification qualifications “on or before 
March 15 of the employee’s second complete consecutive school year of employment 
by the district” in such a position or positions. ( .) If such notice is not provided, 
“the employee shall be deemed reelected for the next succeeding school year.” ( .)
4. The 2021/2022 school year was respondent’s first year as a certificated 
employee of SJCOE. She never had a second. SJCOE had “complete discretion” 
regarding her reelection or non-reelection for the 2022/2023 school year. 
(  (2002) 95 Cal.App.4th 1026, 1029.) The 
decision to non-reelect respondent was not required to be supported by a showing of 
good cause or a statement of reasons, and she was not entitled to appeal the decision. 
(.)
THE COMMISSION ’S DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURES
5. Every potential ground for disciplining a credential must be presented to 
the Committee for review. (Ed. Code, § 44242.5, subd. (a).) The Commission appoints 
the members of the Committee. (Ed. Code, § 44240, subd. (a).) “The [C]omission may 22assign to the Committee of Credentials administrative duties as it may see fit relating 
to adverse actions concerning . . . credential holders.” (Ed. Code, § 44243, subd. (a).)
6. The Committee may initiate a formal review upon receipt of notice that a 
credential holder failed to honor an employment contract without good cause. (Ed. 
Code, § 44242.5 subds. (b)(5) & (d)(5).) The Committee must give the credential holder 
at least 30 days advance notice of any formal review. (Ed. Code, § 44244, subd. (a).) The 
notice must include: (1) the specific allegations of misconduct, underlying factual basis, 
and statutes and/or regulations purportedly violated; and (2) a warning that “the 
allegations, if true, are sufficient to cause . . . her . . . credential to be subject to adverse 
action.” ( ) 
7. When a formal review is initiated, the Committee “shall investigate all 
alleged misconduct and the circumstances in mitigation and aggravation.” (Ed. Code, 
§ 44242.5, subd. (c).) The investigation must include: (1) evaluation of the credential 
holder’s fitness to perform the duties authorized by her credential; (2) a written 
summary of the uncontested and contested facts, factors in aggravation or mitigation, 
and applicable law; and (3) a determination of the existence or nonexistence of
probable cause to discipline the credential. ( ., subd. (c)(1)–(3), see Ed. Code, § 44244, 
subd. (b)(1).) If the Committee concludes no probable cause exists, the investigation 
shall be terminated. ( ., subd. (c)(3)(A).) If it concludes probable cause does exist and 
the credential holder challenges the conclusion, “the [C]ommission shall initiate an 
adjudicatory hearing . . . by filing an accusation.” ( ., subd. (c)(3)(B).) 
8. “Upon completion of its investigation, the [C]ommittee shall report its 
actions and recommendations to the [C]ommission, including its findings as to 
probable cause, and if probable cause exists, its recommendations as to the 
appropriate adverse action.” (Ed. Code, § 44242.5, subd. (e)(1), see Ed. Code, § 44244, 23subd. (d).) The Committee’s recommendation must be provided to the credential 
holder, along with any appeal rights she has. (Ed. Code, § 44244, subd. (d).) If the 
credential holder timely files an appeal, “the administrative hearing is a trial de novo.” 
(Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80317.) 
9. The Commission may adopt the Committee’s recommendation to take 
adverse action “without further proceedings if, after service of notice of the 
[C]ommittee recommendation pursuant to Section 44244, the credential 
holder . . . fails to give notice of intent to request an administrative hearing or if . . . she 
gives notice of intent not to request an administrative hearing within 30 days.” (Ed. 
Code, § 44244.1, subd. (a)(1).) 
10. SJCOE notified the Committee that respondent abandoned her 
employment contract without good cause. The Committee initiated a formal 
investigation pursuant to Education Code section 44242.5, subdivisions (b)(5) and (c) 
(5). The Committee subsequently voted to recommend to the Commission that cause 
existed to suspend respondent’s credentials for 30 days. Respondent was notified of 
the recommendation and requested an administrative hearing challenging it. The 
Commission’s discipline is not limited to only suspending respondent’s credentials for 
30 days. (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80317 [“The administrative hearing is a trial de 
novo”].) 
CAUSE FOR DISCIPLINE
11. Education Code section 44420 authorizes discipline of a credential as 
follows:
(a) If any person employed by a school district in a position 
requiring certification qualifications refuses, without good 24cause, to fulfill a valid contract of employment with the 
district or leave the service of the district without the 
consent of the superintendent, if any, or the governing 
board, of the district except in the manner provided for by 
law, the commission may, after proof of this fact is made to 
it, take an adverse action on the credential holder but may 
not suspend the credential for more than one year or 
revoke the credential.
[¶] . . . [¶]
(c) The [C]ommission shall investigate allegations brought 
under this section in accordance with Section 44242.5. 
Conclusion 
12. Respondent abandoned her job with SJCOE on May 4, 2022, when she 
notified Ms. Christenson and Ms. Garrett she would not be returning to the classroom. 
She did not have good cause for refusing to return to the classroom. Therefore, she 
violated Education Code section 44920, subdivision (a), by refusing to fulfill her 
employment contract with SJCOE.
13. Respondent’s job abandonment demonstrates her unfitness to teach. She 
produced no credible evidence otherwise. To the contrary, at hearing she continued to 
show a lack of true appreciation for the impact her decision had on some of society’s 
most vulnerable students. Therefore, the only appropriate discipline is a one-year 
suspension of all her credentials.25ORDER
Respondent Rebecca Plaud’s clear education specialist instruction credential, 
child development site supervisor permit, and all other credentials, certificates, and 
authorizations the Commission on Teacher Credentialing issued her are SUSPENDED 
for one year beginning the effective date of this Decision. 
DATE: April 22, 2024  
COREN D. WONG 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings
 