BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
In the Matter of the Accusation Against: 
CRISTIAN MILEY, Respondent 
Case No. 2-279301465 
OAH No. 2023060417 
PROPOSED DECISION 
Timothy J. Aspinwall, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative 
Hearings (OAH), State of California, heard this matter by videoconference on February 
28 and 29, 2024, from Sacramento, California. 
Kevin W. Bell, Deputy Attorney General, represented Mary Vixie Sandy, Ed.D. 
(complainant), Executive Director of the California Commission on Teacher 
Credentialing (Commission). 
Barry J. Bennett, Attorney at Law, represented Cristian Miley (respondent), who 
was present. 
Evidence was received, the record closed, and the matter was submitted for 
decision on February 29, 2024. 2 FACTUAL FINDINGS
Jurisdictional Matters 
1. On September 1, 1998, the Commission issued a Clear Pupil Personnel 
Services Credential (Personnel Services Credential) to respondent. On September 19, 
2023, the Commission issued a Clear Administrative Services Credential (Administrative 
Services Credential) to respondent. Both credentials were in full force and effect at all 
times relevant to this matter. 
2. On January 19, 2023, complainant, acting in her official capacity, signed 
and thereafter caused to be filed the Accusation in this matter. Complainant seeks to 
revoke all credentials, certificates, and authorizations issued to respondent, based on 
respondent’s alleged conduct related to a report that an 11th grade boy (LG) sexually 
assaulted a 9th girl (CG). Both CG and LG were then students at Delhi High School 
(Delhi High) in the Delhi Unified School District (District). Respondent timely filed a 
notice of defense, and this hearing followed. 
Report to Respondent of Sexual Assault and Respondent’s 
Subsequent Actions 
VG’S TESTIMONY AND WRITTEN STATEMENTS
3. VG is CG’s mother. Complainant called her to testify. VG’s testimony and 
written statements are summarized in relevant part below. 
4. During the early morning hours of April 15, 2021, CG came to VG’s 
bedroom and told her tearfully about what LG had done to her in September 2019. CG 
told her mother that during Spanish class, LG sat next to her at a table in the 3 classroom where she was sitting alone. LG started with some “small talk” about 
basketball, then put his hand on CG’s thigh. CG pushed his hand off repeatedly and 
moved to a seat on the other side of the table. LG then followed and sat down next to 
CG. LG again put his hand on CG’s thigh and moved his hand up underneath her skirt 
and touched her “private area” twice on the outside of CG’s underwear. This occurred 
near the end of class. When the bell rang she left the class crying. 
5. The day following the incident, LG approached CG at school and said he 
was “sorry” for what he had done, but told CG she had “asked for it” and warned her 
not to say anything. Some other male students watched LG apologize. CG was so 
embarrassed and traumatized by the assault and the threat that she kept quiet. 
6. CG was prompted to tell her mother what happened because CG’s 
boyfriend had invited LG to his birthday party. When CG learned of this, she told her 
boyfriend what LG had done and asked her boyfriend to disinvite LG. CG’s boyfriend
disinvited LG and told CG she needed to tell someone about the incident. 
7. Later in the morning on April 15, 2021, after CG told her mother of the 
incident, VG called the office at Delhi High and asked for an appointment with 
respondent, who was then the Principal of Delhi High. VG was given an 11:00 a.m. 
appointment to meet with respondent at the school office that same morning. VG 
arrived on time and waited until 11:35 while respondent was in a videoconference. VG 
had to leave and return to work before respondent could meet with her. VG is 
employed by the District at a location other than Delhi High. 
8. Respondent called VG by telephone during the afternoon of April 15, 
2021. VG told respondent what CG had told her. Respondent told VG he had been 
working with LG and his parents, and that LG was a “wonderful boy” who had come a 4 long way and was “doing great.” Respondent also told VG that there was not much he 
could do because the incident occurred approximately 18 months prior. 
9. VG told respondent that some other students had witnessed LG’s 
apology and knew what had happened. VG gave respondent the names of two 
students she could remember. Respondent told VG that one of the students had 
moved away, and that the other was “locked up.” VG told respondent she could get 
the names of some other students who saw the apology, but respondent “brushed it 
off.” Respondent told VG he would talk with LG and get back to her.
10. Respondent did not ask to speak with CG. VG never told respondent that 
he could not speak with CG or that he did not need to do so. 
11. VG told respondent that she was going to meet with law enforcement, 
and that they wanted to know what the school was going to do about the incident. 
Respondent laughed and said that law enforcement always turns the matter back to 
the school, and that there was nothing they could do since it happened 18 months 
ago. 
12. During the same conversation, respondent told VG he would call his 
“good buddy” who worked in law enforcement. Later the same day, respondent called 
VG by telephone and told her he had spoken with his friend in law enforcement. 
Respondent’s tone was more serious. Respondent said his friend had informed him 
that it was not uncommon for situations like this to come to light months or even 
years later. 
13. VG made a report to the Merced County Sheriff’s Department on April 
21, 2021, regarding the sexual assault CG had described to her. On June 4, 2021, VG 
met with and reported the incident to the District Superintendent Adolfo Melara. 5 Superintendent Melara referred VG to the District Director of Human Resources, 
Alberto Verduzco, who interviewed CG on June 4, 2021. VG later also told Acting 
Superintendent Joseph Serratore of the incident after Mr. Melara resigned to take 
another position outside the District. 
RESPONDENT ’S TESTIMONY AND WRITTEN STATEMENTS
14. Respondent is currently employed as the principal of a middle school in 
East Palo Alto. During April 2021, he was employed as the Principal of Delhi High. 
Respondent knew both CG and LG through his work at Delhi High. 
15. During April 2021, respondent was not taking in-person appointments at 
his office because of COVID-19 restrictions. On April 15, 2021, respondent’s secretary 
told him that VG had called by telephone. Respondent returned VG’s call in the 
afternoon. VG reported to respondent what her daughter CG had told her earlier that 
morning about the sexual assault in 2019, and LG’s apology and threat the following 
day. Respondent asked VG for the names of the students who watched LG apologize. 
VG told him that CG did not have their names. 
16. Respondent asked if he could speak with CG. VG responded that her 
daughter did not feel comfortable talking about the incident. Respondent also asked if 
CG could provide a written statement. VG responded by asking “what for?”
17. Respondent told VG that he was “familiar” with LG. Respondent said it 
would be disappointing if LG had done what CG alleged.
18. Respondent told VG that he would investigate the incident, and that he 
would interview LG. He also stated he would call a member of law enforcement he 6 knew. He told VG he would contact her with any information he obtained from law 
enforcement. 
19. Directly following his conversation with VG, respondent called Detective 
Michael Ramirez and left a voicemail, then sent an email. Detective Ramirez responded 
very quickly to the email, and they spoke by telephone the same day. Detective 
Ramirez encouraged respondent to tell VG to file a report with the Sheriff’s office, and 
that he could serve as a point of contact. Detective Ramirez told respondent to warn 
VG that investigating detectives would ask questions of CG that would seem “harsh or 
crass.” 
20. Respondent then called VG and let her know that Detective Ramirez had 
offered to serve as a point of contact. VG told respondent she would file a report with 
a deputy sheriff she knew. He told VG that an investigating deputy would ask “crass” 
questions of CG, as Detective Ramirez had warned, but not to discourage VG from 
reporting the assault. 
21. Respondent interviewed LG a few days after his conversation with VG and 
Detective Ramirez. LG denied that he engaged in any of the alleged conduct. At that 
point, respondent did not have any other information to substantiate the allegations. 
Respondent documented his interview of LG in AIRES, an electronic student 
information system in the District. Respondent did not take any further action. 
22. Respondent understood his responsibilities as a mandated reporter to 
make a telephonic report to law enforcement of sexual assault by one student against 
another. To his understanding, he was not required to file a written report with law 
enforcement. He was also required to report the incident to the District Director of 
Student Services, but she was out on an indefinite leave of absence. For this reason, 7 respondent did not file a report with the District. Instead, he left a note in AIRES by 
which he documented his interview of LG, who was the only witness available for him 
to interview. 
23. To respondent’s understanding, a mandated reporter must report 
instances of child neglect or abuse to child protective services (CPS) within 36 hours of 
learning of it. To respondent’s thinking, the allegation of sexual assault against CG was 
not a case of abuse or neglect that must be reported to CPS. 
24. On June 4, 2021, Superintendent Melara called respondent and told him 
that VG had reported what happened to her daughter and complained that nothing 
had been done about it. Respondent told Superintendent Melara about his 
conversations with VG, Detective Ramirez, and his interview of LG. Superintendent 
Melara told respondent he would ask Human Resources Director Alberto Verduzco to 
investigate the abuse allegations. 
25. Respondent did not hear about this matter again until September 2021, 
when Acting Superintendent Joseph Serratore asked respondent to meet with him and 
the new director of human resources. Acting Superintendent Serratore told 
respondent that VG told him she had reported the incident to respondent and former 
Superintendent Melara, that nothing had been done, and that something needed to 
be done to respondent. Respondent told Acting Superintendent Serratore that the 
whole matter had been handled by Superintendent Melara and Mr. Verduzco. 
DETECTIVE RAMIREZ’S TESTIMONY AND WRITTEN STATEMENT  
26. Respondent called Detective Michael Ramirez to testify. His testimony 
and his written statement dated April 8, 2022, which was admitted in evidence for all 
purposes without objection, are summarized below.8 27. Detective Ramirez has been employed by the Merced County Sheriff’s 
Department since 2014. He has been serving as a detective since 2020. He is familiar 
with respondent because respondent has assisted the Sheriff’s Department in several 
cases involving students in the District. Detective Ramirez and respondent are not 
social friends. 
28. On April 15, 2021, Detective Ramirez received an email from respondent 
regarding CG’s allegation of sexual assault and sent him an email reply. Detective 
Ramirez and respondent also spoke by telephone on the same date. Respondent told 
Detective Ramirez that a young female student told her mother earlier that morning 
that a male student had touched her inappropriately during class approximately 18 
months earlier, and that the day after the incident the male student apologized to the 
female student for his conduct and told her not to say anything about the incident.
29. Respondent told Detective Ramirez he did not have any witnesses, and 
asked whether he should have VG call the Sheriff’s office to file a report. Respondent 
added that he has never had a situation where reported misconduct was such a long 
time after the incident. 
30. Detective Ramirez told respondent it is not uncommon for allegations of 
sexual assault to be reported so long after the fact. He further told respondent a 
report could be made by calling dispatch, and that it would then be assigned to a 
detective who specializes in those cases. Detective Ramirez told respondent to let him 
know if he or the family had any questions. Detective Ramirez never got the 
impression that respondent was indifferent about this matter. 9 Investigation of Sexual Assault by Detective Zambrano
31. Detective Zambrano of the Merced County Sheriff’s Department did not 
testify. His written investigation reports were offered by complainant and admitted in 
evidence for all purposes without objection. Detective Zambrano’s investigative 
reports are summarized in relevant part below.
32. On April 21, 2021, Detective Zambrano was dispatched to Delhi High 
regarding a sexual assault report. He arrived at approximately noon, at which time he 
interviewed VG, who told him what CG had told her during the early morning hours of 
April 15, 2021. Detective Zambrano asked VG whether she had contacted the school 
principal to report the incident. She stated she had, but it seemed like the principal 
(respondent) did not care about what she was reporting. She said respondent told her
they could not do anything about it because it happened a long time ago. She said 
respondent also told her that if she reported the incident to the Sheriff’s Department 
that the deputy would intimidate CG because she waited so long to report the 
incident. VG was very upset about how respondent acted as she reported the incident 
to him. 
33. Detective Zambrano then interviewed CG in VG’s presence on April 21, 
2021. CG told Detective Zambrano what she had told her mother, as recited above. On 
May 27, 2021, Detective Zambrano conducted a follow-up interview of CG at the 
Merced County Sheriff’s Office. CG again told Detective Zambrano what LG had done. 
34. On June 3, 2021, Detective Zambrano interviewed LG at the Merced 
County Sheriff’s Office. LG confirmed he had a Spanish class with CG during his junior 
year. He remembered speaking with CG a couple times during class projects. LG stated 
he never inappropriately touched CG, and that he would never do anything like that. 10 LG stated he “barely knew” CG and that he never had any physical contact with her 
except that he “might have high-fived her.” 
Alberto Verduzco’s Testimony, Notes, and Letter of Support  
35. Respondent called Alberto Verduzco to testify. His testimony, notes, and 
letter of support are summarized in relevant part below. 
36. Mr. Verduzco is currently employed by the Santa Clara County Office of 
Education, as one of the Directors of Human Resources. He previously served as the 
Director of Human Resources at the District from 2019 to June 25, 2021.
37. On June 4, 2021, Superintendent Melara directed Mr. Verduzco to 
investigate the allegation that LG had sexually harassed or assaulted CG. On the same 
date, Mr. Verduzco met with LG and CG in separate offices to interview them and 
obtain written statements. Mr. Verduzco met with CG with her mother present. CG 
wrote in her statement essentially the same account of events as she had told her 
mother, VG. LG denied he had done anything to CG. He wrote that he did not 
associate with her, and only talked with her about assignments in Spanish class. He 
asserted that he would never do these things to a girl, and that he is not that type of 
person.
38. On June 4, 2021, Mr. Verduzco also spoke by telephone with Merced 
County Sheriff’s Detective Zambrano to verify that he was investigating the case, and 
that he had obtained statements from CG and LG. Detective Zambrano confirmed that 
he had obtained statements from both students, and that he had collected all the 
evidence he needed to complete the investigation. 11 39. On June 22, 2021, Mr. Verduzco again called Detective Zambrano for a 
status update. Detective Zambrano informed Mr. Verduzco he had completed the 
investigation and forwarded it to the District Attorney’s Office for a determination 
whether to file charges against LG. Mr. Verduzco then called VG to inform her 
Detective Zambrano had submitted the case to the Merced County District Attorney. 
40. Mr. Verduzco testified that teachers are mandated reporters. In the event 
they suspect child abuse they are required to file a report with CPS, then call CPS or 
law enforcement to inform them a report was submitted. Teachers should notify the 
district superintendent or director of human resources. A teacher should also notify 
the director of student services of any reportable event. Neither Superintendent 
Melara nor Mr. Verduzco had been notified of the alleged assault prior to June 4, 2021.
41. Mr. Verduzco left his notes in a secure file in the District Human 
Resources Office for the new administration. Mr. Verduzco left for his new job on June 
25, 2021. 
42. On July 13, 2021, Mr. Verduzco prepared a letter recommending 
respondent to prospective employers. The letter states that respondent is “passionate 
about education, teaching, learning, and helping students.” In recommending 
respondent for a position as a school administrator, Mr. Verduzco noted that 
respondent is “persistent, relentless, and focused on the school’s vision, mission, and 
goals.” 12 District’s Investigation of Respondent’s Conduct and Letter of 
Reprimand 
JOSEPH SERRATORE ’S TESTIMONY , LETTER OF REPRIMAND ,AND LETTER OF 
SUPPORT
43. Complainant called Joseph Serratore to testify. His testimony, letter of 
reprimand, and letter of support are summarized in relevant part below. 
44. Mr. Serratore is retired from serving as the Acting District Superintendent
following Superintendent Melara’s resignation in August 2021. Mr. Serratore 
previously served for 20 years as the District Assistant Superintendent for 
Administrative Services. 
45. In his capacity as Acting Superintendent, Mr. Serratore investigated 
respondent’s conduct in response to the report of sexual assault of CG. Mr. Serratore 
did not delegate the investigation to the new director of human resources because he 
felt it would not be one of her strengths to investigate this matter in part because 
respondent has a strong personality. 
46. Mr. Serratore initiated the investigation after VG reported to him that the 
prior administration under Superintendent Melara and Mr. Verduzco had not taken 
any action. Mr. Serratore did not call Mr. Verduzco because they are on “bad terms.”
Mr. Serratore cannot remember whether he called former Superintendent Melara, but 
Melara does not return his phone calls.
47. Mr. Serratore interviewed respondent and VG. He did not interview CG, 
as he was investigating respondent’s failure to report the incident, not the incident 13 itself. VG told Mr. Serratore what her daughter CG had told her, and that she had 
reported the same to respondent. 
48. Mr. Serratore’s testimony about his interview of respondent included 
inconsistent statements by respondent. First, Mr. Serratore testified that respondent 
told him that he had spoken with VG, CG, LG, and a friend he had in law enforcement 
regarding the alleged assault. Second, on cross-examination, Mr. Serratore testified 
that respondent told him that he did not interview CG because VG would not allow 
him to do so. Neither party elicited testimony to address the implication of this 
specific inconsistency – i.e., whether respondent made inconsistent statements, 
whether Mr. Serratore’s account of the interview is accurate, or some other explanation 
for the inconsistency. However, it is noted that respondent’s testimony and written 
statements are consistent on the point that he did not interview CG because VG would 
not allow him to do so. 
49. Mr. Serratore’s impression following his interviews of respondent and VG 
was that VG’s account was more believable. Mr. Serratore did not believe respondent’s 
statement that he had interviewed CG. Mr. Serratore did not include in his testimony 
regarding credibility that respondent told him he did not interview CG. 
50. Mr. Serratore felt that respondent did not adequately investigate the 
allegations. Respondent should have interviewed more witnesses, including CG. Also, 
respondent should have contacted the District about the allegations. 
51. Mr. Serratore does not recall respondent telling him that he documented 
his interview of LG in AIRES. If respondent had told him, Mr. Serratore would have read 
it. 14 52. Based on his investigation, Mr. Serratore issued a written reprimand to 
respondent on September 29, 2021. The written reprimand was admitted in evidence 
to establish the fact that Mr. Serratore issued the reprimand, not to establish the truth 
of the statements in the reprimand. Respondent prepared a revised reprimand 
containing his account of events, including that VG told respondent that CG did not 
want to discuss the matter of the assault. 
53. On November 3, 2021, Mr. Serratore prepared a letter recommending 
respondent to prospective employers. The letter states in part as follows: 
“[Respondent] is a dedicated and tireless administrator who wants every student to 
succeed. As Principal at Delhi High School, [respondent] has focused on creating the 
best possible environment for student learning . . . .” Mr. Serratore wrote the letter to 
emphasize respondent’s strengths. He does not write letters of recommendation for 
“people who are liars.” 
Respondent’s Supporting Witnesses and Letters of Support 
MATTHEW WELLMAN’S TESTIMONY AND LETTER OF SUPPORT
54. Mr. Wellman is employed as the Music Director of Delhi High. He met 
respondent in 2019, when respondent was the Associate Principal of Delhi High. Mr. 
Wellman is aware of the allegation that respondent failed to properly report an 
incident of sexual harassment. He regards this as categorically false based on his 
understanding of the situation and his knowledge of respondent’s character and 
values. 
55. In Mr. Wellman’s experience, respondent was “easily the most student 
engaged” administrator with whom he has ever worked. Respondent “knew every 
student’s name” and something about each student. 15 56. To Mr. Wellman’s observation, respondent “does what he says and means 
what he says.” He never saw respondent as indifferent to anything. It would be unlikely 
for respondent to treat the sexual assault lightly. It would come as a surprise to Mr. 
Wellman if respondent did not speak to the victim of a sexual assault, tried to dissuade 
the victim’s mother from filing a complaint, failed to report the incident to the school 
administration, or failed to file a police report. If these allegations are correct, it would 
change Mr. Wellman’s mind about respondent. 
HANNAH COLEMAN’S TESTIMONY AND LETTER OF SUPPORT
57. Hannah Coleman is employed by the District as a middle school teacher. 
During the 2021 calendar year, she worked at Delhi High as a biology teacher and the 
Director of Athletics and Activities. Ms. Coleman is aware of the allegation that 
respondent mishandled a sexual harassment claim. To her understanding the 
allegation is false and completely contrary to the person and professional she knows 
respondent to be. 
58. Respondent was Ms. Coleman’s direct supervisor. To her observation, 
respondent is a good administrator and honest person who puts the needs of students 
first. She never saw him display indifference toward students. Ms. Coleman considers 
respondent to be a mentor, as she occasionally reached out to him with professional 
questions. 
59. Ms. Coleman does not know what respondent did to investigate the 
alleged assault at issue in this matter. She believes if sexual assault was reported to 
respondent, he would perform due diligence. If he did not investigate, she would 
change her mind about him. 16 ADDITIONAL LETTERS OF SUPPORT
60. Superintendent Melara wrote a letter dated July 13, 2021, recommending 
respondent to potential employers. Respondent was hired as the Assistant Principal 
prior to the 2019/2020 school year, and “immediately established a rapport with 
students and staff.” Respondent was promoted to the position of high school principal 
prior to the 2020/2021 school year. Respondent “remained a strong advocate for our 
students and worked hard to ensure our students received the best services possible.” 
Superintendent Melara regarded respondent as “an instrumental team member to our 
organization.” 
61. Respondent submitted an additional four letters of support written by 
individuals who previously worked with respondent in various roles in school 
administration and student counseling. These letters speak of respondent in laudatory 
terms, similar to the letters of support reviewed above. 
Analysis of Evidence 
62. The evidence established that respondent understood his responsibilities 
as a mandated reporter to require that he make a telephonic report to law 
enforcement of the alleged sexual assault against CG, and that the District required 
that he notify the Director of Student Services. The evidence also established that 
respondent did not notify the District of the alleged assault, and instead left a note in
AIRES describing his interview of LG. Respondent’s stated reasoning for not notifying 
the District was that the District Director of Student Services was out on an indefinite 
leave of absence. 
63. The finding here is that respondent’s decision to leave a note in AIRES 
without any further notification to the District was inadequate for purposes of 17 notifying the District of the alleged sexual assault. The inadequacy of the AIRES note is 
evidenced by the fact that neither Superintendent Melara nor Director of Human 
Resources Verduzco had been notified of the alleged sexual assault before VG brought 
it to Superintendent Melara’s attention in June 2021.
64. Respondent’s failure to notify the District of the alleged sexual assault 
prevented the District from being able to timely respond to VG’s report that LG had 
sexually assaulted her daughter in class. This was a significant harm to the education 
system and potentially to CG, though evidence was not presented regarding the latter. 
65. Beyond this, the evidence is not clear what respondent’s reporting 
obligations were as a mandated reporter and employee of the District. Respondent’s 
view is that he was not required to file a written report with law enforcement, and that 
the alleged sexual assault against CG was not a case of abuse or neglect that must be 
reported to CPS. Mr. Verduzco’s understanding is that mandated reporters are 
required to file a report with CPS, then call CPS or law enforcement to inform them of 
the suspected child abuse. Mr. Verduzco was not asked during his testimony whether 
he would draw any distinction between child abuse reportable to CPS, and a sexual 
assault by one student against another. Based on the evidence presented, this tribunal 
is not in a position to make a finding whether any such distinction exists. 
66. The evidence is also contested regarding what VG told respondent when 
she reported the sexual assault to him on April 15, 2021. VG testified that she told 
respondent the names of two students who had witnessed LG’s apology to CG, and 
that respondent told her one of the students was “locked up” and the other had 
moved away. Respondent testified that VG said she did not have their names. VG’s 
demeanor while testifying and the level of detail she provided give greater credibility 
to her testimony. The finding here is that her testimony in this regard is factually 18 accurate. In light of this finding, respondent had a responsibility and duty to at 
minimum include the two names in a written or oral report to law enforcement and 
the District. Respondent was dishonest when he asserted that VG said she did not have 
the names of the two witnesses. 
67. VG also testified that she did not tell respondent he could not speak with 
CG or that he need not do so, as respondent claimed. VG’s testimony is given greater 
credibility by the fact that on April 21, 2021, six days after her conversation with 
respondent, she reported the sexual assault to law enforcement and allowed Detective 
Zambrano to interview CG on the same date, and again on May 27, 2021. The finding 
here is that VG did not tell respondent he could not interview CG. Given respondent’s 
choice to initiate interviews, he had a responsibility and duty to interview CG in 
addition to LG. Respondent was dishonest when he asserted that VG told him he could 
not interview CG. 
68. The evidence established that respondent breached his duties and 
responsibilities as a high school principal and mandated reporter. He left a note on 
AIRES, but did not directly notify anyone at the District. He called a detective he knew, 
but left it to VG to formally report the alleged sexual assault. He interviewed LG, but 
not CG. 
69. Based on the letters of support and testimony on respondent’s behalf, it 
is clear that respondent has provided years of dedicated service. Notwithstanding his 
breaches of responsibility, Mr. Serratore and Mr. Verduzco provided letters of 
recommendation. These letters are given significant weight. Mr. Wellman and Ms. 
Coleman also testified and provided letters of support. Both testified that their 
expressed opinion of respondent would change if he failed to properly report a sexual 19 assault. Given the findings above, their testimony and letters of support are given little 
weight. 
LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 
Burden and Standard of Proof 
1. Complainant has the burden of proving cause for adverse action by clear 
and convincing evidence to a reasonable certainty. (
(1982) 135 Cal.App.3d 583, 855–856.) Clear and convincing evidence 
requires proof that is so clear as to leave no substantial doubt and that is sufficiently 
strong to command the unhesitating assent of every reasonable mind. (
(2008) 169 Cal.App.4th 176, 190.) 
Jurisdiction and Applicable Law 
2. Pursuant to Education Code section 44000 et seq., and California Code of 
Regulations, title 5, commencing with section 80001, the Commission is responsible 
for credentialing teachers in public schools in California, including issuing credentials, 
and taking adverse action against applicants and credential holders. (Statutory 
references are to the Education Code unless otherwise specified.) 
3. Section 44421 authorizes the Commission to take adverse action against 
an individual’s credential for, among other specified causes, unprofessional conduct, 
evident unfitness for service, immoral conduct, or for any cause that would warrant 
denial of an application for a credential. Section 44345, subdivision (e), allows the 
Commission to deny an application of one who has committed an act involving moral 
turpitude. 20 Alleged Causes for Adverse Action
UNPROFESSIONAL CONDUCT
4. Unprofessional conduct in the teaching profession has been defined as 
that which violates the rules or ethical code of the profession or is unbecoming of a 
member of the profession in good standing. (
(1953) 41 Cal.2d 546, 553, overruled on other grounds by (1972) 6 
Cal.3d 575.) 
5. Based on the Factual Findings and Legal Conclusions as a whole, 
complainant established by clear and convincing evidence that respondent committed 
unprofessional conduct when he failed to fulfill his duties and responsibilities as a 
mandated reporter and District employee. For these reasons, and based on the Factual 
Findings and Legal Conclusions as a whole, cause exists for adverse action against 
respondent’s credentials pursuant to section 44421. 
IMMORAL CONDUCT 
6. The term “immoral” has been defined generally as “that which is hostile 
to the welfare of the general public and contrary to good morals. . . . [It] includes 
conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, 
dissoluteness; or as willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral indifference 
to the opinions of respectable members of the community, and as an inconsiderate 
attitude toward good order and the public welfare.” (
 (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811.) 
7. Based on the Factual Findings and Legal Conclusions as a whole, 
complainant established by clear and convincing evidence that respondent engaged in 21 immoral conduct when he failed to fulfill his duties and responsibilities as a mandated 
reporter and District employee. For these reasons, and based on the Factual Findings 
and Legal Conclusions as a whole, cause exists for adverse action against respondent’s 
credentials pursuant to section 44421. 
EVIDENT UNFITNESS FOR SERVICE
8. “Evident unfitness for service” means a teacher is clearly not fit, not 
adapted to or unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of temperamental defects 
or inadequacies. (
(1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444.) “Unlike ‘unprofessional conduct,’ 
‘evident unfitness for service’ connotes a fixed character trait, presumably not 
remediable merely on receipt of notice that one’s conduct fails to meet the 
expectations of the employing school district.” ( .) 
9. Based on the Factual Findings and Legal Conclusions as a whole, 
complainant did not establish by clear and convincing evidence that respondent is 
evidently unfit for service, especially given respondent’s record of employment. Based 
on the evidence as a whole, respondent is fit to serve as a credentialed employee. 
ACTS OF MORAL TURPITUDE
10. “Moral turpitude” has been defined as “everything done contrary to 
justice, honesty, modesty or good morals.” ( . 
(1979) 89 Cal.App.3d 30, 36.) An act involves moral turpitude if it involves a serious 
breach of a duty owed to another or to society. (  (2001) 25 
Cal.4th 11, 16.) 22 11. Based on the Factual Findings and Legal Conclusions as a whole, 
complainant established by clear and convincing evidence that respondent committed 
acts of moral turpitude when he failed to fulfill his duties and responsibilities as a 
mandated reporter and District employee. For these reasons, and based on the Factual 
Findings and Legal Conclusions as a whole, cause exists for adverse action against 
respondent’s credentials pursuant to sections 44421 and 44345, subdivision (e). 
AGGRAVATING FACTORS
12. California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80300, subdivision (b), 
states that an “aggravating factor” is “an event or circumstance which demonstrates 
that a greater degree of adverse action for an act of professional misconduct is 
needed to adequately protect the public, schoolchildren or the profession.”
Aggravating factors include dishonesty and harm to the educational system. ( , subd. 
(b)(3) and (4).
13. Based on the evidence, aggravating factors exist in that respondent was 
dishonest in his assertion that VG told him he could not interview CG and that she did 
not have the names of other witnesses, and in that respondent caused harm to the 
District by his failure to report the alleged sexual assault consistent with his 
responsibilities as a mandated reporter and District employee. 
FITNESS TO TEACH 
14. In (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, the California 
Supreme Court concluded that a teaching credential cannot be disciplined for immoral 
conduct, unprofessional conduct, or conduct involving moral turpitude “unless that 
conduct indicates that the [educator] is unfit to teach.” ( . at p. 229.) The Court 
outlined factors to consider when determining whether an educator’s conduct 23 demonstrates unfitness to teach, which have been codified in California Code of 
Regulations, title 5, section 80302, subdivision (a). The criteria are as follows: (1) the 
likelihood of adverse effects on students, fellow teachers, or the educational 
community; (2) the proximity or remoteness in time of the misconduct; (3) the type of 
credential held by respondent; (4) extenuating or aggravating circumstances; 
(5) praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of motives; (6) likelihood of recurrence; 
(7) the extent to which disciplinary action may chill or have an adverse impact upon 
the exercise of constitutional rights among teachers or other persons involved; 
(8) publicity or notoriety of respondent’s misconduct. 
15. The factors are considered, as follows. Respondent’s 
misconduct had an adverse effect on the District, at minimum. Respondent’s 
misconduct is more proximate than remote in time. Respondent’s credentials put him 
near impressionable students, who would be vulnerable if he were to engage in further 
misconduct. Aggravating circumstances exist in that respondent engaged in 
dishonesty and caused harm to the District. Respondent’s misconduct is blameworthy 
in that he chose a course of action in violation of his responsibilities as a mandated 
reporter and District employee. The evidence does not show a likelihood that 
respondent will engage in similar misconduct in the future. Disciplinary action in this 
matter will not have an adverse effect upon anyone’s exercise of constitutional rights.
There is no clear evidence of publicity or notoriety of respondent’s misconduct.
16. On balance, application of the  factors demonstrates a nexus 
between respondent’s misconduct and his fitness to serve as a credentialed employee. 
Taking into account the evidence as a whole, they do not indicate respondent is unfit 
to maintain his credentials. However, a measure of discipline is necessary to protect 
the public. Here, a 30-day suspension with three-year period of probation will provide 24 a time for respondent to reflect on the wrongfulness of his conduct, and a period for 
the Commission to monitor respondent’s conduct. 
ORDER 
The Clear Pupil Personnel Services Credential and the Clear Administrative 
Services Credential issued to respondent Cristian Miley are revoked. However, the 
revocation is stayed, and respondent is placed on probation for three years from the 
effective date of this decision and order on the following terms and conditions. 
SEVERABILITY CLAUSE: Each condition of probation contained herein is a 
separate and distinct condition. If any condition of probation is declared 
unenforceable in whole, in part, or to any extent, the remaining conditions of 
probation, and each of them, shall not be affected. Each condition of probation shall 
separately be valid and enforceable to the fullest extent permitted by law. 
1. ACTUAL SUSPENSION: As part of probation, respondent’s credentials are 
suspended for a period of 30 days beginning the effective date of this decision and 
order.
2. NEW CREDENTIALS SUBJECT TO ORDER: Any new credential issued by 
the Commission to respondent during the period of probation shall be subject to the 
same terms and conditions of probation, as set forth herein. 
3. OBEY ALL LAWS: Respondent shall obey all federal, state, and local laws 
and regulations, including, but not limited to, the statutes and regulations of the 
Commission. 25 Except for minor traffic infractions, within 72 hours of any incident resulting in 
respondent’s arrest, the filing of any criminal charges, or citation issued, respondent 
shall submit a full and detailed description of the incident to the Commission. For 
purposes of this condition, a “minor traffic infraction” includes only traffic violations 
which are punishable by a maximum of $500, and do not subject the offender to 
incarceration or probation. 
4. COMPLIANCE WITH PROBATION: Respondent shall fully comply with the 
terms and conditions of this order and cooperate with representatives of the 
Commission in its monitoring and investigation of his compliance. 
5. COOPERATION WITH COMMISSION: During the period of probation, 
respondent shall be available for interviews with the Commission in person or by 
telephone upon reasonable notice. 
6. MAINTAIN CURRENT CONTACT INFORMATION: Within seven days of the 
effective date of this decision and order, respondent shall notify the Commission of his
current mailing address and phone number where voicemail messages may be left. 
Respondent will notify the Commission in writing of any change of mailing address or 
residence within 10 days of such change. 
7. NOTIFICATION OF EMPLOYER: Within five days of the effective date of 
this decision and order, respondent shall provide a true and correct copy of this 
decision, together with a true and correct copy of the Accusation in this matter, to 
respondent’s employer, if any, and to respondent’s immediate supervisor at that 
employer. Within five days of complying with this notification requirement, respondent 
shall submit proof of compliance to the Commission. 26If respondent changes employment at any time during probation, respondent 
shall again comply with this notification requirement within seven days of accepting 
new employment and shall again submit proof of compliance to the Commission
within five days of complying with this notification requirement. 
8. MAINTAIN ACTIVE, CURRENT CREDENTIALS: During the entire period of 
probation, respondent shall maintain active, current credentials with the Commission, 
including during any period of suspension. 
9. VIOLATION OF PROBATION: The Commission shall retain jurisdiction 
over respondent during the period of probation. If respondent violates any term or 
condition of this order, after giving him written notice and an opportunity to be heard 
on the issue of any violation of probation, the Commission may set aside the stay 
order and impose the revocation of respondent’s credentials. If an accusation or 
petition to revoke probation is filed against respondent during probation, the 
probation period shall automatically be extended until a final decision is made on the 
accusation or petition. 
10. COMPLETION OF PROBATION: Upon successful completion of the terms 
of this probation, respondent’s credentials shall be fully restored. 
DATE: April 2, 2024 
TIMOTHY J. ASPINWALL
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings
