BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Statement of Issues against: 

JOSEPH LAWRENCE SINCLAIR, 

Respondent. 

Agency Case No. 2-254770661 

OAH No. 2023030907 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Administrative Law Judge Deena R. Ghaly, Office of Administrative Hearings 

(OAH), State of California, heard this matter on June 7, 2023, by videoconference. 

Deputy Attorney General William D. Gardner represented Complainant Mary 

Vixie Sandy, Ed.D., (Complainant), Executive Officer of the Commission on Teacher 

Credentialing (Commission). Respondent Joseph Lawrence Sinclair (Respondent) 

represented himself. 

Testimony and documentary evidence was received at the hearing. The record 

was held open until June 21, 2023, for Respondent to submit evidence of good 

character and until June 28, 2023, for any objection or other response from 

Complainant. No further evidence was introduced and the record closed on June 28, 

2023. 

SUMMARY 

Complainant seeks to deny Respondent’s application for a Preliminary Five-Year 

Single Subject Teaching Credential on the grounds he made a material 

misrepresentation in his application, committed an act of moral turpitude, and 

failed to furnish reasonable evidence of good moral character. Cause exists to deny his 

application on two of those grounds, making material misrepresentations and failing 

to furnish reasonable evidence of good moral character. When all the evidence 

is considered, Respondent did not establish his fitness to hold the credential he 

seeks. Therefore, Respondent’s application is denied. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

1. 

On February 1, 2021, the Commission received Respondent’s application 

for a Preliminary Five-Year Single Subject Teaching Credential. He seeks to teach 

physics in secondary schools. Respondent certified under penalty perjury to the 

truthfulness of all statements, answers, and representation in the application. 

2. 

The Commission is responsible for the credentialing of public school 

teachers, including issuing credentials such as those for which Respondent applied. 

(Educ. Code, § 44000 et seq., Cal. Code of Regs, title 5 (Regulation or Reg.), § 80001 et 

seq.) 

3. 

The Commission evaluates teaching credential applications through its 

Committee of Credentials (Committee). In the instant case, the Committee determined 

probable cause existed to deny Respondent’s application. Respondent filed a Notice of 

2 

Defense challenging the Committee’s determination. Complainant issued the 

Statement of Issues and this matter ensued. 

4. 

The Committee’s decision stemmed from its finding Respondent made a 

material misrepresentation in his application, committed an act of moral turpitude 

during a domestic altercation, and failed to provide adequate proof of good character. 

5. 

Regarding whether Respondent made a misrepresentation on an 

application, Complainant contends a statement Respondent included in a written 

addendum to his application, “[m]y daughter was present in the house, but she was 

not witness to the argument” (Exh. 6, p. A66), was not true. The argument referenced 

in Respondent’s statement happened on the night of February 2, 2020 and was part of 

an altercation between Respondent and his wife, M.S. During the altercation, M.S. 

called law enforcement. 

6. 

Complainant introduced the testimony and arrest report of one of the 

law enforcement officers who responded to the home of Respondent and M.S. after 

M.S. called 911, San Luis Obispo Deputy Sheriff’s Office James Moore (D.S. Moore). 

According to D.S. Moore, he interviewed Respondent, M.S., and their daughter. M.S. 

stated the couple was in the process of separating and argued about whether and 

where Respondent could store some of his belongings in the house while he made the 

transition to another residence. According to D.S. Moore, M.S. further stated 

Respondent dumped some of his belongings on M.S., who was pregnant at the time, 

and scraped her hand when he slammed a door on her. D.S. Moore observed “minor 

abrasions” on M.S.’s hand. M.S. also stated Respondent took away her car keys to 

prevent her from leaving their home with their daughter. 

/// 

3 

7. 

When D.S. Moore questioned Respondent, he noted Respondent did 

have a car key in his pants’ pocket, a single key rather than a key on a key chain with 

other routinely used keys. According to D.S. Moore, Respondent admitted he may 

have caused the abrasions on M.S.’s hand as he closed a door between them but it 

was an accident. 

8. 

D.S. Moore also reported on his interview of Respondent and M.S.’s 

daughter. According to D.S. Moore, the daughter reported Respondent reading a book 

to her in her room and then hearing her parents arguing and “Dad being mean to 

Mom.” (Exh. 5, p.A63.) 

9. 

Respondent refutes D.S. Moore’s version of the events. According to 

Respondent, he explained to D.S. Moore he was not trying to prevent M.S. from 

leaving but was merely taking the vehicle M.S. normally drives because his own had 

been flooded and was not drivable. Showing D.S. Moore the single key, unattached to 

a key chain and other keys, was part of his effort to corroborate his explanation as the 

single key is consistent with a spare, rather than a routinely used key. Respondent also 

stated he tried to lead D.S. Moore to the vehicle he normally drives to show him the 

water damage but D.S. Moore refused to allow him to do so and seemed generally 

uninterested in anything potentially exculpating to Respondent. 

10. 

Respondent was ultimately charged with two felonies, violating Penal 

Code section 273.5 (corporal injury to a spouse) and Penal Code section 236 (false 

imprisonment). The criminal court ruled there was insufficient evidence to sustain the 

felony corporal injury to a spouse charge. Through a plea deal, the false imprisonment 

charge was reduced to a misdemeanor. On August 30, 2021, in the California Superior 

Court in San Luis Obispo County, the Respondent pled to a less serious crime, violating 

Penal Code section 415, subdivision 1 (disturbing the peace). The court’s sentence was 

4 

a $222 fine and community service. Respondent maintained he fulfilled the terms of 

his sentence. 

11. 

Besides addressing the issue of his daughter’s whereabouts during the 

altercation with M.S., Respondent wrote the following in his statement to the 

Committee. 

On the evening of 2/2/2020, I was getting ready to drive to 

Marin for a teaching colleague’s funeral the next day. My 

wife and I got into an argument and due to a 

misunderstanding, the police were called. My wife was 

pregnant at the time . . .I . . . regret any disturbance of the 

peace to my wife and I sincerely regret that my daughter 

was present in the same house. I will actively avoid any 

situations like this in the future. I believe that the measure 

outlined in the sections below, of completing couples 

counseling and community service, allowed me to reflect 

and improve. I still pay for and attend couples counseling. 

Nevertheless, I have always maintained that I am innocent 

of the charges. I am very grateful that my wife, [M.S.] has 

always supported me throughout the legal process and she 

is glad that the proceedings are over. 

[¶] . . . [¶] 

I have always maintained extremely rigorous professional 

standards as a teacher. I have never before had a complaint 

of this nature at work or in my home life. I place the safety 

5 

of minors and students as my top priority and I fully comply 

with all background check requirements. I am able to stay 

composed and professional in a wide range of situations 

and school settings. I very much hope that my credential 

application is successful as I am committed to being an 

excellent and professional teacher. I am grateful to my wife 

and family for supporting me in this goal. 

(Exh. 6, pp. A66-A67.) 

12. 

Respondent also gave a recorded interview in connection with the 

Committee’s investigation of his application. During the interview, one of the 

Committee members asked how M.S.’s hands were injured. Respondent replied M.S. 

had been chasing him throughout the house and as he ran away from her, he closed 

doors of rooms behind him and she pounded on those doors. Though he did not see 

her get hurt, due to the loud banging, Respondent assumed it happened when she 

was pounding on the doors he closed between them. 

13.  During his testimony at the hearing, Respondent denied injuring M.S. in 

any way and reiterated he never attempted to prevent her from leaving. On the 

contrary, to the extent there was domestic violence in his relationship with M.S., it was 

M.S., not Respondent who was the instigator. 

14. 

Respondent further maintained he spent years, including the period of 

the altercation and even during the time the Committee was reviewing his application, 

when embarrassment and shame prevented him from fully revealing the truth about 

his application. Regarding the application, Respondent stated he stands by his answer 

on the application addendum: Respondent’s daughter did not witness his argument 

6 

with M.S. Respondent further stated his daughter was asleep in her bed until M.S. 

woke her shortly before calling the police. was not involved in the dispute between 

himself and M.S. but, rather, was sleeping in her bed while the two argued and was 

only awakened and brought out of her room by M.S. just before M.S. called law 

enforcement. 

15. 

Respondent is currently teaching mathematics and physics at a private 

school in San Luis Obispo and has taught at two others in the area. Respondent stated 

he is particularly interested in teaching in a public school setting because he attended 

and succeed at Oxford University in England even though he did not have the benefit 

of the expensive non-governmental schools most of his fellow students attended. 

Respondent believes he can help public school students reach similar educational 

goals and achievements here. 

16. 

Respondent reiterated his denial of ever trying to keep M.S. from leaving 

their home. Respondent also argued the fact that, as D.S. Moore confirmed, the key in 

his pocket was single, unattached to house keys and the like, was consistent with his 

version of events in that a single, unattached key is more likely the spare key. If he 

wanted to prevent M.S. from leaving, he would take her full set of keys. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Proceedings held to decide issues regarding denial or discipline of a 

teaching credential are conducted in accordance with Chapter 5 (commencing with 

Section 11500) of the Government Code. (Educ. Code, § 44246.) Once an 

administrative agency presents evidence supporting the denial of an application for 

licensure, the burden falls upon the applicant to demonstrate rehabilitation and 

7 

fitness to hold the license. The standard of proof is a preponderance of the evidence. 

(Evid. Code, §§ 115, 500.) 

2. 

The [C]omission may deny any application for the issuance of a credential 

or for the renewal of a credential made by any applicant who falls under any of the 

following categories. 

[¶] . . . .[¶] 

(e) Has committed any act involving moral turpitude. 

[¶] . . . .[¶] 

(g) Has intentionally practiced or attempted to practice any 

material deception or fraud in his or her application. 

(h) Fails or refuses to furnish reasonable evidence of 

identification or good moral character. 

[¶] . . . .[¶] 

Any denial pursuant to subdivisions (a) to (e), inclusive, shall 

be based upon reasons related to the applicant’s fitness to 

teach or fitness to perform other duties for which that 

applicant is certificated, or competence to perform the 

duties which the credential would authorize the applicant to 

perform. 

(Educ. Code, § 44345.) 

/// 

8 

First Cause for Denial – Material Deception in a Commission 

Application 

3. 

Complainant’s allegation Respondent committed a material deception 

when stating his daughter was in the house but did not witness the altercation 

between Respondent and M.S. is supported by the evidence. It strains credulity to 

believe a young child would sleep through the events Respondent described - he and 

his wife running through the house, Respondent slamming doors, and M.S. pounding 

on them – yet be up and alert enough to answer D.S. Moore’s questions. 

Second Cause for Denial – Act of Moral Turpitude 

4. 

Complainant’s allegation Respondent committed an act of moral 

turpitude is based on the felony charges initially brought against him. However, mere 

filing of criminal charges is not evidence that the charges are true. Here, the only 

evidence of the Respondent committing these serious crimes are D.S. Moore’s hearsay 

statements about what M.S. and the daughter told him. Such hearsay statements can 

be used to explain or supplement direct evidence but cannot, on their own, establish 

the elements of a claim or charge. (See, Gov. Code, § 11503, subd. (d); Lake v. Reed 

(1997) 16 Cal4th 448,461.) 

5. 

The crime for which Respondent did incur a conviction, disturbing the 

peace, does not meet the criteria to be an act of moral turpitude. “Moral turpitude has 

also been described as any crime or misconduct committed without excuse, or any 

‘dishonest or immoral’ act not necessarily a crime. [Citation.] The definition depends 

on the state of public morals and may vary according to the community or the times, 

as well as on the degree of public harm produced by the act in 

question. [Citation.]” (Clerici v. Department of Motor Vehicles (1990) 224 Cal.App.3d 

9 

1016, 1027;”) Moral turpitude has also been described as the “‘general readiness to do 

evil’.” (Donley v. Davi (2009) 180 Cal.App. 4th 447, 458.) Making enough noise to 

disturb other people is not commendable or desirable behavior but it cannot be 

readily described as dishonest or evil. This is especially the case when considered in 

the context of the further requirement of a teacher credentialing case where conduct 

cannot be characterized as involving moral turpitude unless it indicates a teacher is 

unfit to teach. (See, Morrison v. State Board of Education (Morrison) (1969) 1 Cal.3d 

214, 229.) 

6. 

In making this determination, the Commission may consider such matters 

as: (1) The likelihood that the conduct may have adversely affected students, fellow 

teachers, or the educational community, and the degree of such adversity anticipated; 

(2) The proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct; (3) The type of credential held 

or applied for by the person involved; (4) The extenuating or aggravating 

circumstances surrounding the conduct; (5) The praiseworthiness or blameworthiness 

of the motives resulting in the conduct; (6) The likelihood of the recurrence of the 

questioned conduct; (7) The extent to which disciplinary action may inflict an adverse 

impact or chilling effect upon the constitutional rights of the person involved, or other 

certified persons; (8) The publicity or notoriety given to the conduct. 

7. 

Applying the relevant factors, the conduct was private, unrelated to 

Respondent’s teaching duties, has no relation to Respondent’s plans to teach physics 

in secondary school, does not directly implicate his ability to effectively teach and 

maintain the proper demeanor in a classroom setting, is serious and concerning, 

particularly given that his young daughter was in proximity and his wife, pregnant, was 

vulnerable to stressful or loud situations but again, private and not necessarily 

indicative of Respondent’s conduct and character as a teacher. 

10 

Third Cause for Denial – Failure to Provide Sufficient Proof of Good 

Character 

8. 

Respondent has failed to provide any proof of good character, beyond 

his own testimony. Particularly considering Respondent’s non-credible statement 

about his daughter’s involvement, Respondent’s uncorroborated statement are 

inadequate. Given the burden on applicants to prove their fitness for licensure, 

Respondent’s application for a teaching credential cannot be granted at this time. 

ORDER 

Respondent Joseph Lawrence Sinclair’s application for a Preliminary Five-Year 

Single Subject Teaching Credential is denied. 

DATE: 

DEENA R. GHALY 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings

11 

Deena R. Ghaly (Jul 28, 2023 10:08 PDT)Deena R. Ghaly07/28/2023 
 
 
