BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Accusation/Statement of Issues Against: 

KATHERINE LYNN YETTER, 

Emergency 30-Day Substitute Teaching Permit, 

Certificate of Clearance, Short-Term Staff Permit, 

Application for 30-Day Substitute Teaching Permit, 

Respondent. 

Agency Case No. 2-294260706 

OAH No. 2023040070 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Thomas Heller, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings 

(OAH), State of California, heard this matter by videoconference on July 3, 2023. 

Elaine Yan, Deputy Attorney General, represented complainant Mary Vixie 

Sandy, Executive Director, California Commission on Teacher Credentialing 

(Commission). 

Respondent Katherine Lynn Yetter represented herself. 

Oral and documentary evidence was received. The record was closed, and the 

matter was submitted for decision on July 3, 2023. 

SUMMARY 

Complainant requests that the Commission deny respondent’s application to 

renew her Emergency 30-Day Substitute Teaching Permit and revoke her existing 

credentials and authorizations due to her multiple misdemeanor criminal convictions 

between 2014 and 2022, most of which involved drinking and driving. Respondent 

argues her alcohol abuse is in the past and requests that the Commission allow her to 

continue teaching. The evidence establishes grounds for the Commission to deny the 

application and revoke respondent’s credentials, but outright denial and revocation as 

complainant requests are not warranted. Instead, an order placing respondent on 

probation is the appropriate disciplinary action. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Background and Procedural History 

1. 

On June 1, 2007, the Commission issued an Emergency 30-Day Substitute 

Teaching Permit to respondent, which she renewed annually through March 1, 2022. 

On February 20, 2021, the Commission also issued a Certificate of Clearance to 

respondent, which is scheduled to expire on March 1, 2026, unless renewed. 

Respondent also previously held a Short-Term Staff Permit between January 4 and July 

1, 2007, and an earlier Certificate of Clearance issued on April 18, 2003, that expired on 

May 1, 2008. She has no prior disciplinary history with the Commission. 

2 

2. 

In early February 2022, respondent applied to the Commission for 

another renewal of her Emergency 30-Day Substitute Teaching Permit, but the 

Commission did not grant the application. Instead, on April 18, 2022, it notified 

respondent of its receipt of information requiring an investigation into her fitness to 

hold a credential. The Commission’s notice listed five alleged criminal convictions of 

respondent between July 2014 and March 2022, four of which involved drinking and 

driving. 

3. 

At a meeting in August 2022, the Commission’s Committee of Credentials 

(Committee) considered the criminal conviction information and found probable cause 

to recommend the revocation of respondent’s credentials and certifications and the 

denial of her application. Respondent timely requested reconsideration and an 

administrative hearing. At its meeting in October 2022, the Committee denied the 

request for reconsideration. On February 10, 2023, complainant filed the Accusation 

and Statement of Issues in her official capacity requesting that the Commission act in 

accordance with the Committee’s recommendation. Respondent timely filed a Notice 

of Defense. 

Hearing 

COMPLAINANT’S CASE 

4. 

Complainant presented court records from the Superior Court of 

California, County of Ventura, proving that respondent was convicted of five 

misdemeanor crimes in four criminal cases between July 2014 and March 2022. First, 

after pleading guilty on July 3, 2014, respondent was convicted of one count of driving 

with a blood-alcohol content of 0.08 percent or more in violation of Vehicle Code 

section 23152, subdivision (b). (Case No. 2014012298.) The court suspended 

3 

imposition of sentence and placed respondent on formal probation for 36 months on 

terms requiring her to serve four days in jail, to complete a first-conviction driving 

under the influence program, and to pay fines and fees. The underlying circumstances 

were that on the night of April 21, 2014, police officers observed respondent driving 

with faulty brake lights and conducted a traffic stop. She displayed objective 

symptoms of alcohol intoxication, and two Preliminary Alcohol Screening tests each 

measured her blood-alcohol content as 0.16 percent. Two additional breath tests 

shortly thereafter each measured her blood-alcohol content as 0.15 percent. 

Respondent told the officers she drank about one and a half mini bottles of sake at 

dinner earlier that night. 

5. 

Second, after pleading nolo contendere on August 6, 2019, respondent 

was convicted of one count of driving under the influence of alcohol and one count of 

driving with a blood-alcohol content of 0.08 percent or more in violation of Vehicle 

Code section 21352, subdivisions (a) and (b). (Case No. 2019008078.) The court 

suspended imposition of sentence and placed respondent on formal probation for five 

years on terms requiring her to serve 24 days in jail, to complete a multiple-conviction 

driving under the influence program, and to pay fines and fees. The court also ordered 

respondent not to drink or possess alcoholic beverages and prohibited her from 

owning or operating a vehicle without an ignition interlock device for one year. The 

underlying circumstances were that on the night of March 9, 2019, police officers 

conducted a traffic stop after observing respondent weaving through traffic lanes in a 

vehicle with a faulty left tail light. Respondent had an odor of alcohol coming from her 

breath and displayed objective symptoms of alcohol intoxication. Two Preliminary 

Alcohol Screening tests measured her blood-alcohol content as 0.15 percent and 0.143 

percent, respectively. Respondent told police officers she drank one glass of wine 

earlier that evening. 

4 

6. 

Third, after pleading nolo contendere on September 15, 2020, 

respondent was convicted of one count of driving without a license in violation of 

Vehicle Code section 12500, subdivision (a). (Case No. 2020001056.) The court 

suspended imposition of sentence and placed respondent on conditional revocable 

release for 36 months on terms requiring her to serve one day in jail and to pay fines 

and fees. The underlying circumstances were that on April 12, 2020, a police officer 

observed respondent weaving in and out of traffic lanes and conducted a traffic stop. 

Respondent admitted she was on criminal probation, and Department of Motor 

Vehicles records indicated she had a suspended driver’s license and was required to 

have an interlock device on her vehicle, which she did not. Respondent told the officer 

she was unaware her license was suspended and had permission from her probation 

officer to remove the interlock device, but the officer could not verify respondent’s 

claims. Respondent provided a breath sample at the officer’s request, which was 

negative for the presence of alcohol. 

7. 

Fourth, after pleading nolo contendere on March 4, 2022, respondent 

was convicted again of one count of driving with a blood-alcohol concentration of 

0.08 percent or more in violation of Vehicle Code section 23152, subdivision (b). (Case 

No. 2021024942.) Respondent admitted a special allegation that she had previously 

been convicted of the same offense. The court suspended imposition of sentence and 

placed respondent on formal probation for 60 months on terms requiring her to serve 

120 days in jail, to complete a multiple-conviction driving under the influence 

program, and to pay fines and fees. The court also ordered respondent not to drink or 

possess alcoholic beverages and prohibited her from owning or operating a vehicle 

without an ignition interlock device for one year. The underlying circumstances were 

that on September 21, 2021, a police officer observed respondent talking on her cell 

phone while driving and conducted a traffic stop. A wants and warrants check revealed 

5 

respondent was on criminal probation for a previous driving under the influence 

conviction. Respondent had watery eyes and an odor of alcohol coming from her 

breath, and a breath sample measured her blood-alcohol content at 0.14 percent. 

Respondent also performed poorly on field sobriety tests, and the officer placed her 

under arrest. After her arrest, respondent provided two more breath samples, which 

measured her blood-alcohol content at 0.15 percent and 0.14 percent, respectively. 

Respondent told the officer she drank one standard glass of white wine. 

8. 

Complainant also presented evidence that respondent enrolled in 

residential alcohol abuse recovery program about five months before her most recent 

arrest for drinking and driving, but she left the program early against medical advice in 

late April 2021. 

RESPONDENT’S CASE 

9. 

Respondent does not dispute any of the criminal convictions, which are 

very embarrassing and “harsh reality checks” for her. She testified she has abstained 

from alcohol for 10 months and complied with the 18-month Ventura County Driving 

Under the Influence Program, which she started on January 30, 2023, in connection 

with her most recent criminal case. Respondent regularly attends group recovery 

meetings, and she described recovery as a great tool for personal growth. Respondent 

testified she realizes her drinking had become a problem, and she takes full 

accountability for her misconduct. 

10. 

Respondent testified she voluntarily self-enrolled in the residential 

alcohol abuse recovery program in April 2021. She left that program just a few days 

early in late April 2021 due to issues with her daughter. Her subsequent decision to 

6 

drink and drive in September 2021 was a serious mistake that she is committed not to 

repeat. 

11. 

Respondent is proud of her long record of service as a substitute teacher 

at schools in Ventura County. While her drinking has impacted her personally, she 

testified it has never affected her performance in the classroom. She has not worked as 

a substitute teacher for over a year due to the denial of her renewal application. But 

she testified she has remained gainfully employed as a teacher for a home school 

organization, and as a remote-based English as a Second Language teacher for 

students in Brazil. She also works as a caterer at the Ronald Reagan Presidential Library 

in Simi Valley, California. 

12. 

Supplementing her testimony, respondent presented a status report from 

the Ventura County Driving Under the Influence Program stating she is progressing 

well and serves as an inspiration to group peers. Respondent also presented letters of 

reference from a pastor, her landlord, and a friend. Raymond Cruz, an Assistant Pastor 

and Counselor at Godspeak Calvary Chapel, wrote that respondent has regularly 

attended life coaching sessions with him for eight months and is taking the proper 

steps to improve her lifestyle. Marybeth Green, respondent’s landlord, wrote that 

respondent has been an excellent tenant and has become a valuable friend. Michelle 

Honles, a friend, wrote that respondent has been open and honest about her recovery 

and has been diligent in pursuing it. 

/// 

/// 

/// 

7 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

Legal Standards 

1. 

“The commission may deny any application for the issuance of a 

credential or for the renewal of a credential made by any applicant who . . . [h]as 

committed any act involving moral turpitude.” (Ed. Code, § 44345, subd. (e).) 

Furthermore, the Commission “shall privately admonish, publicly reprove, revoke or 

suspend [a credential] for immoral or unprofessional conduct, . . . or for any cause that 

would have warranted the denial of an application for a credential or the renewal 

thereof, or for evident unfitness for service.” (Ed. Code, § 44421.) 

2. 

“Moral turpitude is a concept that ‘defies exact description’ [citation] and 

‘cannot be defined with precision’ [citation].” (In re Grant (2014) 58 Cal.4th 469, 475-

476.) “Our Supreme Court has defined moral turpitude as ‘an act of baseness, vileness 

or depravity in the private and social duties which a man owes to his fellowmen, or to 

society in general, contrary to the accepted and customary rule of right and duty 

between man and man.’ [Citation.] Moral turpitude has also been described as any 

crime or misconduct committed without excuse, or any ‘dishonest or immoral’ act not 

necessarily a crime. [Citation.] The definition depends on the state of public morals 

and may vary according to the community or the times, as well as on the degree of 

public harm produced by the act in question. [Citation.]” (Clerici v. Department of 

Motor Vehicles (1990) 224 Cal.App.3d 1016, 1027; see also Ricasa v. Office of 

Administrative Hearings (2018) 31 Cal.App.5th 262, 281; Golde v. Fox (1979) 98 

Cal.App.3d 167, 185.) Moral turpitude has also been described as the “‘general 

readiness to do evil.’ [Citation.]” (Donley v. Davi (2009) 180 Cal.App.4th 447, 458.) 

/// 

8 

3. 

“The term ‘immoral’ has been defined generally as that which is hostile to 

the welfare of the general public and contrary to good morals. Immorality has not 

been confined to sexual matters, but includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or 

indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; or as wilful, flagrant, or 

shameless conduct showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable 

members of the community, and as an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and 

the public welfare. [Citation.]” (Orloff v. Los Angeles Turf Club (1951) 36 Cal.2d 734, 

740; see also Board of Education of San Francisco Unified School Dist. v. Weiland 

(1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811.) “Unprofessional conduct” has been described as 

“‘that which violates the rules or ethical code of a profession or such conduct which is 

unbecoming a member of a profession in good standing.’” (Board of Education of the 

City of Los Angeles v. Swan (1953) 41 Cal.2d 546, 553, quoting 66 Corpus Juris 55, 

overruled in part on another ground in Bekiaris v. Board of Education (1972) 6 Cal.3d 

575, 587, fn. 7.) “[T]he definition of immoral or unprofessional conduct must be 

considered in conjunction with the unique position of public school teachers, upon 

whom are imposed ‘responsibilities and limitations on freedom of action which do not 

exist in regard to other callings.’ [Citation.]” (San Diego Unified School Dist. v. 

Commission on Professional Competence (2011) 194 Cal.App.4th 1454, 1466 (San 

Diego Unified).) 

4. 

For purposes of teacher discipline, conduct cannot be characterized as 

immoral, unprofessional, or involving moral turpitude unless it indicates a teacher is 

unfit to teach. (Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 229 

(Morrison).) The Morrison court “establish[ed] seven factors an administrative agency 

such as the Commission should utilize to determine whether the unprofessional 

conduct demonstrated unfitness to teach: . . . [1] the likelihood that the conduct may 

have adversely affected students or fellow teachers, [and] the degree of such adversity 

9 

anticipated, [2] the proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct, [3] the type of 

teaching certificate held by the party involved, [4] the extenuating or aggravating 

circumstances, if any, surrounding the conduct, [5] the praiseworthiness or 

blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the conduct, [6] the likelihood of the 

recurrence of the questioned conduct, and [7] the extent to which disciplinary action 

may inflict an adverse impact or chilling effect upon the constitutional rights of the 

teacher involved or other teachers. . . .’ [Citation.]” (Broney v. California Com. on 

Teacher Credentialing (2010) 184 Cal.App.4th 462, 474 (Broney).) “The Commission 

may also take into account the notoriety and publicity accorded a teacher’s conduct. 

[Citation.]” (Ibid.) The Commission’s Committee of Credentials considers these factors 

in its investigations of alleged teacher misconduct. (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80302.) 

“Only the pertinent Morrison factors need to be analyzed. [Citation.]” (Broney, supra, 

184 Cal.App.4th at p. 474.) 

5. 

Complainant also alleges evident unfitness for service as a ground for 

disciplinary action against respondent. Evident unfitness for service “properly means 

‘clearly not fit, not adapted to or unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of 

temperamental defects or inadequacies.’ Unlike ‘unprofessional conduct,’ ‘evident 

unfitness for service’ connotes a fixed character trait, presumably not remediable 

merely on receipt of notice that one’s conduct fails to meet the expectations of the 

employing school district.” (Woodland Joint Unified School Dist. v. Commission on 

Professional Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444, fn. omitted (Woodland).) 

On this ground for disciplinary action, the Morrison criteria “must be analyzed to 

determine, as a threshold matter, whether the cited conduct indicates unfitness for 

service. [Citation.] If the Morrison criteria are satisfied, the next step is to determine 

whether the ‘unfitness’ is ‘evident’; i.e., whether the offensive conduct is caused by a 

defect in temperament.” (Id. at p. 1445.) 

10 

Jurisdiction and Burden of Proof 

6. 

The Committee of Credentials acquires jurisdiction to commence a 

review of acts or omissions by a credential holder upon receipt of one of several 

enumerated documents. (Ed. Code, § 44242.5.) The list of enumerated documents 

includes “[o]fficial records of the Department of Justice, of a law enforcement agency, 

of a state or federal court, and of any other agency of this state or another state.” (Id., 

subds. (b)(1)(A), (d)(1)(A).) The Committee received such records in this case and found 

probable cause to recommend discipline against respondent’s teaching credential. 

Therefore, the Commission has jurisdiction to proceed. (Little v. Commission on 

Teacher Credentialing (2022) 84 Cal.App.5th 322, 330-331.) 

7. 

Complainant requests that the Commission revoke respondent’s 

previously-issued credentials and certifications and deny her application to renew her 

Emergency 30-Day Substitute Teaching Permit. With respect to revocation, 

complainant bears the burden of proving the alleged grounds for revocation by clear 

and convincing evidence to a reasonable certainty. (See Gardner v. Commission on 

Professional Competence (1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035, 1039-1040; Ettinger v. Board of 

Medical Quality Assurance (1982) 135 Cal.App.3d 853, 856.) Clear and convincing 

evidence “requires a finding of high probability,” and has been described as “requiring 

that the evidence be ‘“so clear as to leave no substantial doubt”; “sufficiently strong to 

command the unhesitating assent of every reasonable mind.”‘ [Citation.]” (In re Angelia 

P. (1981) 28 Cal.3d 908, 919.) “Evidence of a charge is clear and convincing so long as 

there is a ‘high probability’ that the charge is true. [Citations.] The evidence need not 

establish the fact beyond a reasonable doubt.” (Broadman v. Commission on Judicial 

Performance (1998) 18 Cal.4th 1079, 1090.) 

/// 

11 

8. 

With respect to the renewal application, respondent bears the burden of 

proving that she meets all prerequisites for the renewal. (Martin v. Alcoholic Beverage 

Control Appeals Bd. of Cal. (1959) 52 Cal.2d 259, 265-266.) This burden of proof 

requires proof by a preponderance of the evidence (Evid. Code, § 115), which means 

“‘evidence that has more convincing force than that opposed to it.’ [Citation.]” (People 

ex rel. Brown v. Tri-Union Seafoods, LLC (2009) 171 Cal.App.4th 1549, 1567.) 

Analysis 

CAUSES FOR DISCIPLINE 

Unprofessional Conduct 

9. 

Complainant requests disciplinary action against respondent for alleged 

unprofessional conduct, evident unfitness for service, immoral conduct, and acts of 

moral turpitude. With respect to unprofessional conduct, complainant proved by clear 

and convincing evidence that respondent acted unprofessionally by drinking and 

driving on three occasions between 2014 and 2021, resulting in four alcohol-related 

criminal convictions. Respondent committed multiple criminal acts that endangered 

the safety of the public and herself, which was conduct “‘unbecoming a member of a 

profession in good standing.’” (Board of Education of the City of Los Angeles v. Swan, 

supra, 41 Cal.2d at p. 553.). 

10. 

Furthermore, consideration of the factors described in Morrison and 

California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80302 indicates respondent’s conduct 

demonstrates an unfitness to teach and thus constitutes unprofessional conduct for 

purposes of disciplinary action under Education Code section 44421: 

/// 

12 

(1) 

The likelihood that the conduct may have adversely affected 

students or fellow teachers, and the degree of such adversity anticipated. Complainant 

did not present evidence of an adverse effect of respondent’s conduct on students or 

fellow teachers. The evidence presented does not prove students or fellow teachers 

learned of respondent’s criminal convictions, and complainant did not counter 

respondent’s testimony that her conduct did not adversely affect her work. 

(2) 

The proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct. Respondent’s 

conduct is proximate in time. Her last criminal conviction was in March 2022 (based on 

conduct in September 2021), and the Committee’s investigation before only a few 

months later. Respondent’s previous criminal convictions reflect a pattern of conduct 

that continued until September 2021. 

(3) 

The type of credential held or applied for by the person involved. 

Respondent has applied for renewal of an Emergency 30-Day Substitute Teaching 

Permit, and she holds a current Certificate of Clearance. If the application is granted, 

these credentials would authorize respondent to teach kindergarten through twelfth-

grade students. The effect of the use of and overindulgence in alcohol by such 

students is a significant concern for parents and school administrators. 

(4) 

The extenuating or aggravating circumstances surrounding the 

conduct. The Commission has promulgated non-exhaustive lists of mitigating and 

aggravating factors. (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80300, subds. (b), (m).) Respondent’s lack 

of prior discipline and long history as a substitute teacher are extenuating 

circumstances. Aggravating circumstances are respondent’s multiple acts of 

wrongdoing demonstrating a pattern of misconduct; her repetition of similar 

misconduct despite prior notice, warnings, and reprimands against drinking and 

13 

driving in successive criminal cases; and her indifference toward the dangers of 

drinking and driving as demonstrated by her repeat offenses. 

(5) 

The praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives resulting 

in the conduct. There is nothing praiseworthy about drunk driving. “‘The lack of 

praiseworthiness in [respondent’s] conduct speaks for itself.’” (Broney, supra, 184 

Cal.App.4th 462, 477.) 

(6) 

The likelihood of the recurrence of the questioned conduct. The 

evidence supports a finding of a risk of recurrence of the questioned conduct. 

Respondent testified she has abstained from alcohol for 10 months, but she has four 

criminal convictions for three instances of drunk drinking within the last 10 years, and 

she committed the most recent offense in September 2021 while on criminal 

probation for a prior conviction. These facts raise a legitimate concern about whether 

respondent will reoffend. 

(7) 

The extent to which disciplinary action may inflict an adverse 

impact or chilling effect upon the constitutional rights of the teacher involved or other 

teachers. Disciplinary action in this case will not inflict an adverse impact or chilling 

effect upon the constitutional rights of respondent or other teachers. 

(8) 

The publicity or notoriety given to the conduct. Respondent’s 

course of conduct was public in nature, although there was no evidence presented it 

was actually known to her students or colleagues. Her excessive use of alcohol has 

been brought to the attention of authorities; her infractions are public offenses; she 

was arrested in public places; the charges against her required public appearances; 

and her convictions became matters of public record. 

/// 

14 

11. 

The majority of the above-described factors support complainant’s 

assertion that respondent’s misconduct demonstrates an unfitness to teach. Therefore, 

the Commission may take disciplinary action against respondent’s credentials for 

unprofessional conduct. 

Evident Unfitness for Service 

12.  With respect to evident unfitness for service, having determined above 

that the Morrison criteria indicate unfitness to teach, “the next step is to determine 

whether the ‘unfitness’ is ‘evident’; i.e., whether the offensive conduct is caused by a 

defect in temperament.” (Woodland, supra, 2 Cal.App.4th at p. 1445.) Respondent has 

repeated her misconduct involving drinking and driving despite multiple arrests, 

criminal charges, and convictions with increasingly serious consequences. This 

“connotes a fixed character trait, presumably not remediable merely on receipt of 

notice that one’s conduct fails to meet the expectations of the employing school 

district” or, in this case, the expectations of drivers set by law. (Id. at p. 1444.) 

Therefore, the Commission may also take disciplinary action against respondent’s 

credentials for evident unfitness for service. 

Immoral Conduct and Acts of Moral Turpitude 

13.  With respect to immoral conduct and acts of moral turpitude, 

“[c]onvictions for drunk driving . . . do not per se establish moral turpitude.” (In re 

Kelley (1990) 52 Cal.3d 487, 494.) Therefore, a finding of immoral conduct or acts of 

moral turpitude “must be based on the particular circumstances surrounding the 

convictions.” (Ibid.) 

14. 

Respondent’s most recent criminal conviction for driving with a blood-

alcohol content of 0.08 percent or more despite similar convictions in the past 

15 

evidences a conscious indifference to the serious dangers and potential consequences 

of her conduct. From this conduct, one can infer a “‘“depravity in the private and social 

duties which a man owes to his fellowmen, or to society in general, contrary to the 

accepted and customary rule of right and duty between man and man.”‘ [Citations.]” 

(People v. Forster (1994) 29 Cal.App.4th 1746, 1757.) Respondent also committed her 

most recent criminal offense while still on probation in a prior criminal case for the 

same offense. 

15. 

Furthermore, “the definition of immoral or unprofessional conduct must 

be considered in conjunction with the unique position of public school teachers,” who 

are role models for their students. (San Diego Unified, supra, 194 Cal.App.4th at p. 

1466.) Respondent’s conduct did not meet the standards of her unique position of a 

role model who teaches by example as well as precept. (Watson v. State Bd. of 

Education (1971) 22 Cal.App.3d 559, 565). She demonstrated a disregard for public 

safety and an unfitness to teach as described above. Therefore, the Commission may 

also take disciplinary action against respondent’s credentials for immoral conduct and 

for committing acts of moral turpitude. (See id. [affirming denial of credential to 

applicant with series of alcohol-related criminal convictions that the trial court opined 

“clearly indicate and speak for themselves that this man is unfit to teach and work with 

young people. . . . I don’t know what better evidence there could be of immorality than 

a series of criminal convictions.”].) 

Cause for Denial 

16.  With respect to respondent’s renewal application, complainant requests 

that the Commission deny it because respondent committed acts of moral turpitude. 

As described above, complainant proved respondent committed acts of moral 

turpitude, and those acts indicate an unfitness to teach under the Morrison criteria. 

16 

Therefore, the Commission may deny the renewal application due to those acts. (Ed. 

Code, § 44345, subd. (e).) 

DISPOSITION 

17.  With causes for disciplinary action and denial established, the 

Commission must determine the appropriate disposition. Respondent’s criminal 

convictions evidence a long-term pattern of alcohol abuse, and her last offense and 

conviction are relatively recent. Respondent testified she has abstained from alcohol 

for 10 months, but she is still on criminal probation for the last conviction, and she has 

not completed the multi-offender driving under the influence program required as a 

term of probation. Her rehabilitative efforts, while in progress, are not complete. 

18. 

These facts weigh in favor a strong disciplinary order that specifically 

addresses the possibility of recurrence. At the same time, she has no prior disciplinary 

history, and complainant presented no evidence to counter respondent’s testimony 

that, despite her alcohol-related problems, she has performed well as a teacher. She is 

actively participating in recovery, and she displayed a commitment not to repeat her 

misconduct. These facts weigh against a disciplinary order that complete excludes her 

from the teaching profession. A disciplinary order that includes a stayed revocation 

with probation is appropriate and consistent with the results in similar cases. (See 

Broney, supra, 184 Cal.App.4th at p. 471 [stayed revocation with probation and 

suspension for a teacher with three misdemeanor drunk driving convictions]; Griffiths 

v. Superior Court (2002) 96 Cal.App.4th 757, 767 [stayed revocation with probation for 

physician with three misdemeanor criminal convictions involving alcohol 

consumption].) 

/// 

17 

ORDER 

The application of Katherine Lynn Yetter for renewal of her Emergency 30-Day 

Substitute Teaching Permit is granted; however, the credential is immediately revoked, 

and all other credentials, certificates, and authorizations issued to respondent are also 

revoked. However, the revocations are stayed, and respondent is placed on probation 

for five years from the effective date of this order on the following terms and 

conditions. 

1. 

Severability Clause. Each condition of probation contained herein is a 

separate and distinct condition. If any condition of this Order, or any application 

thereof, is declared unenforceable in whole, in part, or to any extent, the remainder of 

this Order, and all other applications thereof, shall not be affected. Each condition of 

this Order shall separately be valid and enforceable to the fullest extent permitted by 

law. 

2. 

Compliance with All Terms of Probation. Respondent shall fully 

comply with all the terms and conditions of this Order and cooperate with the 

Commission and her assigned probation compliance monitor in the monitoring and 

investigation of respondent’s compliance with probation terms. Respondent shall 

participate in a telephone or in-person review of the probation terms with 

respondent’s assigned monitor. Respondent must participate in such review within 14 

calendar days after written request is mailed by the monitor. Failure to participate in 

the review of probation terms within the time stated above shall be considered a 

probation violation. 

Respondent shall also respond to all requests made by the monitor, responding 

to written requests sent by mail within 14 calendar days of the request, and within two 

18 

business days after a telephone message or email request, unless a different time 

period is otherwise stated in this Order. Failure to respond within the time specified 

shall be considered a probation violation. 

3. 

Notification of Current Mailing Address, Email Address, and 

Telephone Number. Respondent shall notify the monitor of her current mailing 

address, email address, and telephone number where voicemail or text message may 

be left. Respondent shall notify the monitor, in writing, within 72 hours, of any change 

of mailing address, email address, or telephone number. Failure to notify the monitor 

within the specified time period stated above shall be considered a probation 

violation. 

4. 

Submit Written Reports. Respondent shall report to the Commission 

quarterly, on a schedule designated by the Commission or the monitor. Reports shall 

be made either in person or in writing, as directed. Among other requirements as 

determined by the Commission, respondent shall state in each report under penalty of 

perjury whether she has complied with all the terms and conditions of probation. 

Failure to submit timely reports as directed shall be considered a probation violation. 

5. 

Obey All Laws. Respondent shall obey all federal, state and local laws, 

including all provisions of the California Education Code. To permit monitoring of 

compliance with this condition, respondent shall submit completed fingerprint forms 

and fingerprint fees within 30 days of the effective date of the decision, unless 

previously submitted as part of the teaching credential application process as 

determined by the monitor. Failure to comply with these provisions shall be 

considered a probation violation. 

/// 

19 

6. 

Criminal Court Orders. If respondent is under criminal court orders, 

including probation or parole, she shall comply with all terms and conditions of such 

orders. Respondent shall report any alleged violation of a court order to her monitor 

within 72 hours of receipt of notice alleging such violation. Failure to comply with 

these provisions shall be considered a probation violation. 

7. 

Report Any Arrest or Citation. Respondent shall submit to the monitor 

a full and detailed written account of any and all arrests or citations for any violation of 

law in California or any other state (except minor traffic offenses) within three business 

days of the arrest or citation. Failure to notify the monitor within the specified time 

period stated above shall be considered a probation violation. 

8. 

Employment Reporting Requirements. If respondent is currently 

employed in a position that requires her to have a California teaching credential, 

respondent shall provide a copy of this Order and the Accusation and Statement of 

Issues to her employer (as defined in California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 

80300) and immediate supervisor within five days after its effective date. If, during the 

probation period, respondent obtains new employment that requires her to have a 

California teaching credential, respondent shall provide a copy of this Order and the 

Accusation and Statement of Issues to her employer and immediate supervisor before 

commencing work. Failure to comply with these provisions shall be considered a 

probation violation. 

In addition, respondent shall notify her monitor in writing within five business 

days of the effective date of this Order of the name and address of her current 

employer that requires her to have a California teaching credential. Respondent shall 

notify her monitor in writing within three business days of the cessation of any 

employment that requires a California teaching credential, or change of employer that 

20 

requires her to have a California teaching credential. Notifications shall contain a 

detailed explanation of the circumstances surrounding the cessation or change of 

employment. Failure to provide notice to the monitor within the time stated above 

shall be considered a violation of probation. 

9. 

Abstain from Possession, Consumption, or Use of Alcohol, Cannabis, 

and Controlled Substances. Respondent shall completely abstain from the 

possession, consumption, or use of alcohol, cannabis, and controlled substances, 

except when ordered by a health care professional legally authorized to do so as part 

of documented medical treatment. Respondent shall provide documentation of 

prescriptions, recommendations, orders, and treatment plans of health care 

professionals for the use of these prohibited substances within five days following the 

request of the monitor. Failure to comply with these provisions shall be a violation of 

probation. 

10. 

Submit to Tests and Samples. Respondent shall submit to bodily fluid 

testing for the presence of alcohol, cannabis, or controlled substances at the request 

of respondent’s employer, immediate supervisor, or law enforcement. 

In addition, respondent shall, at her expense, fully cooperate with the 

Commission or any of its representatives, including the assigned compliance monitor, 

during the period of probation and shall, when requested, submit to such tests and 

samples as the Commission or the assigned monitor may require for the detection of 

alcohol, cannabis, or controlled substances. 

Respondent’s failure or refusal to submit to testing as required above shall 

constitute a probation violation. In addition, any positive test for alcohol, cannabis, or 

a controlled substance, not lawfully prescribed by a licensed health care professional 

21 

as part of documented medical treatment, shall constitute a probation violation. Two 

diluted test results during the period of probation shall also constitute a violation of 

probation. 

11.  Dependency Support Program. Each month, respondent shall be 

required to attend at least three 12-step recovery meetings or equivalent (e.g., 

Alcoholics Anonymous, Narcotics Anonymous, etc.). Respondent shall submit dated 

and signed documentation confirming such attendance to the Commission during the 

entire period of probation. Such documentation shall be due with each quarterly 

report respondent files with the Commission. 

12. 

Therapy or Counseling Program. Respondent, at her expense, shall 

participate in on-going therapy until such time as the Commission releases her from 

this requirement and only upon the recommendation of the therapist. Respondent 

shall comply with any and all treatment recommended by the therapist. Written 

progress reports from the therapist will be required at various intervals. 

13. 

Execute Release Forms. Respondent shall execute and submit to the 

monitor any Release of Information forms that the Commission may require to 

monitor her compliance with this Order, including but not limited to Release of 

Information forms concerning the results of bodily fluid testing performed by third 

parties. Failure to do so shall be considered a probation violation. 

14.  Maintenance of Active Credential. Respondent shall at all times 

maintain an active, current credential with the Commission, including during any 

period of suspension. Failure to do so shall be considered a probation violation. 

15. 

Violation of Probation. If respondent violates any term or condition of 

this Order, the Commission may refer the matter to the Attorney General’s Office to 

22 

file a Petition to Revoke Probation, and after giving respondent notice and opportunity 

to be heard, may set aside the stay order and impose the stayed discipline. If during 

the period of probation, a Petition to Revoke Probation has been filed against 

respondent’s credentials, or the Attorney General’s Office has been asked to prepare a 

Petition to Revoke Probation against respondent’s credentials, the probationary period 

shall automatically be extended and shall not expire until final action is taken on the 

Petition by the Commission. 

16. 

Completion of Probation. Upon successful completion of probation, 

respondent’s credential(s) shall be fully restored. This Order will remain a matter of 

public record after completion of the probationary period. 

DATE: 

THOMAS HELLER 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings 

23 

Thomas Heller (Aug 2, 2023 09:36 PDT)08/02/2023 
 
 
