BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Second Amended Accusation Against: 

JOSHUA ZAREK TAYLOR, Respondent 

Agency Case No. 2-322369896 

OAH No. 2023040579 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Sean Gavin, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings (OAH), 

State of California, heard this matter by videoconference on October 23 through 26, 

2023, from Sacramento, California. 

Stephanie Alamo-Latif, Deputy Attorney General, represented Mary Vixie Sandy, 

Ed.D. (complainant), Executive Director of the California Commission on Teacher 

Credentialing (Commission). 

Jonathan Turner, Attorney at Law, represented Joshua Zarek Taylor 

(respondent), who was present throughout the hearing. 

Evidence was received and the hearing concluded on October 26, 2023. The 

record was held open for complainant to file a First Amended Accusation. Complainant 

did so, and the record closed. Thereafter, complaint moved to reopen the record to file 

a Second Amended Accusation to correct an omission in the First Amended 

Accusation. Respondent dd not oppose the request. The record was reopened and 

complainant filed a Second Amended Accusation. The First Amended Accusation, 

request to reopen the record, and Second Amended Accusation were marked as 

Exhibits 29 through 31, respectively, and admitted. The record closed and the matter 

was submitted for decision on November 3, 2023. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Jurisdictional Matters 

1. 

On June 1, 2009, the Commission issued respondent a Clear Multiple 

Subject Teaching Credential, which will expire on July 1, 2024, unless renewed. 

2. 

Respondent previously held an Emergency 30-day Substitute Teaching 

Permit, issued on February 7, 2003, which expired on June 1, 2005. Respondent also 

previously held a Preliminary Multiple Subject Teaching Credential, issued on August 

26, 2005, which expired on September 1, 2010. 

3. 

On November 3, 2023, complainant, acting in her official capacity, filed 

the Second Amended Accusation (Accusation) against respondent. Complainant seeks 

to revoke all credentials, certificates, and authorizations issued to respondent, based 

on his alleged unprofessional conduct, immoral conduct, evident unfitness for service, 

and commission of acts involving moral turpitude while working as a teacher at Walter 

E. Woodward Elementary School (Woodward), in the Manteca Unified School District 

(the District). The Accusation alleged respondent was tardy to work several times 

between August 2018 and February 2021, was unfit to teach on two days in November 

2020 and February 2021, and had suspicious and unauthorized items in his pockets 

and desk in February and June 2021. 

2 

4. 

Respondent filed a Notice of Defense. This hearing followed. 

Complainant’s Evidence 

RESPONDENT’S TARDINESS 

5. 

In the 2018-2019 school year, respondent taught fourth grade at 

Woodward. Classes started at 8:30 a.m. Woodward required teachers to open their 

classrooms by 8:15 a.m. to greet students and prepare to begin teaching at 8:30 a.m. 

6. 

As of September 2018, Christine Benson was Woodward’s Vice Principal. 

On September 19, 2018, she gave respondent a letter of warning for being late to 

work. She identified four days between August 23 and September 18 on which 

respondent did not open his classroom by 8:15 a.m. She explained “[t]his negatively 

impacts your students as it is impossible that you could be ready to greet students for 

the day and be prepared to teach when you are walking into class with them as the 

bell rings.” She also noted respondent’s “tardiness sets a very poor example for your 

students.” She concluded her letter, “I am directing you to arrive to work within the 

parameters of your contract and by at least 8:15 a.m. each day.” 

7. 

As of January 2020, Sherrie Jamero was Woodward’s Principal. On 

January 10, 2020, she gave respondent a letter of reprimand for failing to attend the 

full day of a staff development training known as “EdCon.” In the letter, she noted she 

and Ms. Benson worked the sign-in desk for teachers between 7:30 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. 

When respondent had not signed in, they stayed until 8:30 a.m., but respondent did 

not arrive by then. Ms. Jamero emailed respondent to ask why he had neither signed 

in nor entered his absence in Frontline, the District’s attendance management 

platform. Respondent did not reply. Ms. Jamero did not see or hear from him until he 

arrived a few minutes after the afternoon session started at 12:30 p.m. When Ms. 

3 

Jamero asked respondent if he attended the morning keynote speaker session, 

respondent replied he “caught the tail end of it.” 

8. 

In her letter, Ms. Jamero noted she and Ms. Benson met with respondent 

in August 2019 to review Woodward’s expectation that respondent would arrive to 

work on time. Based on his ongoing tardiness, Ms. Jamero notified him that, starting 

January 13, 2020, he was to sign in at the school office when he arrived each morning. 

9. 

Between January 13 and March 13, 2020, respondent signed in at 

Woodward’s front office each day he arrived at work. He signed in late on 22 of the 36 

school days during that period. 

10. 

In the 2020-2021 school year, respondent taught sixth grade at 

Woodward. Classes started at 8:00 a.m. Due to COVID-19 restrictions, Woodward held 

classes virtually. Woodward required teachers to be on campus by 7:45 a.m. to prepare 

to begin teaching by 8:00 a.m. The first day of school was August 6, 2020. 

11. 

As of July 2020, Sandy del Mundo was Woodward’s new Vice Principal. 

On July 31, 2020, she sent respondent an email to introduce herself and to remind him 

of his responsibility to be on time. She wrote, in relevant part, “It is your professional 

responsibility to ensure that you are prepared for instruction by 8:00 a.m. on Thursday, 

August 6th.” She continued, “If you are not able to attend or complete your 

professional responsibilities, please make sure you enter in your leave in Frontline.” 

12.  On August 6, 2020, Ms. del Mundo gave respondent a letter of reprimand 

for being late to work that day. She wrote, in relevant part, “You failed to be on 

campus by 7:45 a.m. on August 6, 2020. You started your on-line session at 8:03 a.m.” 

She also noted parents contacted the administration on August 5 and 6 to complain 

respondent had not communicated with them about how their children could access 

4 

class information. She explained respondent’s tardiness was an ongoing problem that 

violated the teachers’ collective bargaining agreement. She further wrote: 

Failing to communicate with parents impacts their families’ 

schedules and understanding of the educational process. 

Your tardiness impacts the instructional program of your 

students. During distance learning, the expectation is that 

students will be logged on and ready to learn at 8:00 a.m. It 

is the teacher’s professional obligation and responsibility to 

be ready to start class at 8:00 a.m. It is important to ensure 

that students start with a positive note at the beginning of 

the school year. 

13. 

Based on respondent’s tardiness, Ms. del Mundo notified him that, from 

August 7 through October 9, 2020, he was to “report immediately to the office by 7:45 

a.m. each morning,” where he would sign in with his arrival time. He signed in late on 

at least 20 of the 41 school days during that period. (Many of the entries are illegible). 

14.  On November 5, 2020, Ms. Jamero gave respondent a letter of reprimand 

for tardiness. She noted respondent was late to work on November 2 and 4, 2020. She 

summarized his past reprimands for tardiness and warned, “Your tardiness impacts the 

instructional program of your students. During distance learning, the expectation is 

that students will be logged on and ready to learn at 8:00 a.m. It is the teacher’s 

professional obligation and responsibility to be ready to start class at 8:00 a.m.” 

15.  Ms. Jamero reminded respondent, “Beginning Monday, November 16th, 

the intermediate students will be on campus to arrive at your classroom between 7:45-

7:50 AM.” As a result, she explained, “Effective Friday, November 6, 2020, you will 

5 

report directly to your classroom by 7:45 a.m. each morning. You are directed to call 

our office manager . . . and let her know you are in your classroom. She will document 

the call and time of call each day until Friday, December 18th.” 

16. 

As of January 2021, Heather Thomson was Woodward’s new Principal. On 

January 26, 2021, she emailed respondent to thank him for notifying the office he 

would be late to work that day, but also to counsel him to leave substitute teacher 

lesson plans readily accessible in his classroom. Ms. Thomson covered respondent’s 

class until he arrived that day, but she was unable to find any substitute teacher lesson 

plan in his classroom. She also wrote, “Prior to my arrival at Woodward the practice 

was that you were to call the office once you got to your classroom to let them know 

that you are here. Moving forward we will be putting this step back into practice.” 

17.  On February 3, 2021, Ms. Thomson emailed respondent to arrange a 

meeting to discuss his ongoing tardiness. She noted that on January 28 and 29 and 

February 1 and 2, 2021, he telephonically checked in with the office after 7:45 a.m. She 

wrote, “My concerns continue and we will need to meet. The agreement was you 

would be in your classroom calling at 7:45 and that has not been accomplished yet. 

There still aren't lesson plans and your room is disorganized. [Ms. del Mundo] and I 

will meet with you on Thursday.” 

RESPONDENT’S BEHAVIOR ON NOVEMBER 2, 2020 

18. 

In early November 2020, Woodward held its sixth grade classes virtually. 

On November 2, 2020, parents of two of respondent’s students contacted the 

administration to complain about respondent’s demeanor while teaching. The parents 

reported respondent appeared to be falling asleep and drooling. 

6 

19. 

In response, Ms. Jamero and Ms. del Mundo logged into respondent’s 

class session and observed him. They also observed respondent falling asleep and 

drooling. They then went to his classroom to talk to him in person. During their 

conversation, they confirmed their belief that respondent was unfit to teach and 

should be removed from the classroom. They asked him to tell the students he would 

be leaving for the day and a substitute teacher would conclude their instruction. He 

did so, telling the students, “They are saying I am unfit because parents are 

complaining. I am surprised and not happy about it. The principal and vice principal 

are saying I am unfit, so I have to listen to them.” 

20. 

Complainant submitted a recording of the relevant portion of 

respondent’s class session on November 2, 2020. For approximately 30 minutes, 

respondent dozed, drooled, and was confused and unresponsive to his students’ 

questions. At one point while apparently sleeping, he spontaneously said, “You guys, if 

the song says ‘do not, like, do this,’ that means ‘do not do that.’” Several times, the 

students asked what they were supposed to be doing. 

21.  On November 5, 2020, Ms. Jamero gave respondent a letter of reprimand 

for his conduct on November 2. She informed him, among other things, “It is your 

professional responsibility to be ready to teach every day and conduct yourself in a 

way that promotes a positive culture in your classroom. This was not the case on 

Monday, November 2, 2020. Involving your students in the conversation regarding 

your inability to teach on this day, is also unprofessional.” She warned respondent: 

Effective immediately, I am directing you to complete the 

following tasks: 

7 

Be present at your classroom door, each day/on time, ready 

to accept students in your classroom or online when 

implementing Distance Learning. 

Provide a positive classroom atmosphere to encourage 

student engagement. 

Be prepared with lesson plans for a substitute if you are not 

feeling well or fit to teach for the day and require a 

substitute. 

RESPONDENT’S BEHAVIOR ON FEBRUARY 4, 2021 

22.  On February 10, 2021, Ms. Thomson gave respondent a letter of 

reprimand for unsatisfactory performance and having dangerous items on campus on 

February 4, 2021. She wrote, in relevant part: 

On February 4th, 2021, Mrs. Del Mundo and I were assisting 

a student on the playground and notice[d] that your 

classroom door was not opened at 12:10 to receive 

students as agreed upon in our mitigation plan. The office 

called your classroom, but you didn't answer your 

classroom phone. At 12:20 there was an all call for you to 

come to your classroom. A minute later you opened your 

classroom door. You were sweating, you dropped your 

mask, and your pants were below your bottom exposing 

your underwear to students and staff. At this point Mrs. Del 

Mundo and I entered your classroom. 

8 

23.  Ms. Thomson further noted that, once inside the classroom, she and Ms. 

del Mundo observed respondent had “great difficulty determining where to start the 

lesson,” began the lesson late, and lacked a clear teaching objective. Ms. Thomson 

observed he seemed disorganized and unprepared, reacted slowly, and was 

distractable. She and Ms. del Mundo were concerned respondent was under the 

influence of drugs or alcohol or experiencing a medical problem. They determined he 

was unfit to teach and Ms. del Mundo took over instructing his students. 

24.  Ms. Thomson and Ms. del Mundo testified at hearing consistent with one 

another and with the letter of reprimand. Ms. Thomson further explained she and 

respondent next went to the administration office, where they met with the District’s 

Director of Certificated Personnel, Dante Alvarez, Ed.D., and Woodward’s School 

Resource Officer (SRO). (An SRO is a police officer assigned to a local campus.) The 

SRO searched respondent’s pockets and found a folding pocketknife and two lighters. 

Respondent explained he had the knife for personal security. Based on their own 

observations and the SRO’s stated opinion, Woodward’s administrators believed 

respondent was unsafe to drive himself home, so they asked him to arrange for a ride. 

Respondent’s parents picked him up approximately two hours later. While Ms. 

Thomson and Dr. Alvarez waited, they continued to talk with respondent. They noted 

he drifted in and out of sleep during these discussions. 

ITEMS FOUND IN RESPONDENT’S CLASSROOM ON JUNE 15, 2021 

25.  On June 15, 2021, custodians cleaned out several classrooms after the 

end of the school year. In respondent’s classroom, they found a vape pen near his desk 

chair. The custodians contacted administration. Ms. Thomson and Ms. del Mundo went 

to respondent’s classroom. To ensure there were no other unauthorized items left 

behind, they searched the desk and surrounding area. On a nearby bookshelf, they 

9 

found a narrow strip of aluminum foil with a crusted burnt residue on it. Inside the 

desk, which did not have a lock on it, they found matches, prescription nasal spray, 

and two packs of buprenorphine-naloxone sublingual films, a prescription medication. 

26.  Most of the text on the buprenorphine-naloxone packets had been 

covered by Wite-Out or similar white correction tape. Ms. Thomson and Ms. del 

Mundo scratched off the tape to determine the packets’ contents. They photographed 

the packets. In addition to the name and dose of the medication, the tape had also 

covered the phrase “Rx only” and the warnings, “Children who accidentally take 

buprenorphine and naloxone sublingual film will need emergency medical care” and 

“Keep buprenorphine and naloxone sublingual film out of the reach of children.” 

RESPONDENT’S RESIGNATION FROM THE DISTRICT 

27. 

Based on respondent’s conduct, the District prepared legal paperwork to 

terminate his employment. On August 10, 2021, respondent and the District signed a 

contract agreeing the District would place him on unpaid administrative leave until 

June 30, 2022, at which time his resignation would become effective. He has not 

worked anywhere else since his resignation. 

Respondent’s Evidence 

28. 

Respondent testified he always wanted to be a teacher and believed he 

was “following in the family footsteps.” Several family members, including his father, 

were teachers. After receiving his credential in 2009, he began teaching at Woodward 

in the 2010-2011 school year. He taught sixth grade his first year, fourth grade the 

next eight years, and sixth grade his last year. He believes he is a good teacher and 

submitted evaluations and notes from students to support his opinion. 

10 

29. 

In respondent’s evaluations, from April 2018 and April 2020, Ms. Benson 

rated him as “meets expectations” in all six categories, including “developing as a 

professional educator.” That category covered, among other skills, being on time. In 

2018, Ms. Benson noted “[respondent] is working to meet his professional 

responsibility of being on campus at least 15 minutes before school starts and attend 

all required meetings on time.” In 2020, she noted, “[respondent] still struggles with 

time management at times. He does not always respond in a timely way to email 

communications from parents, staff, and administration in a timely manner. However, 

[respondent] has made progress in these areas this school year.” 

30. 

At hearing, respondent acknowledged he was occasionally late to class. 

He lived far from campus and often struggled to plan his commute around 

unpredictable freeway traffic. In addition, when the administration required him to 

sign in at the office, doing so delayed him more. He understood Woodward required 

teachers to be in their classrooms at least 15 minutes before class started, but teachers 

did not teach in that time. Rather, students ate their breakfast in class and teachers 

finalized their daily preparations. Respondent often stayed late after school, 

sometimes for hours, to prepare for the next day. Therefore, he did not need the extra 

15 minutes in the morning to prepare. Even when he was late to campus, he rarely 

began class after the scheduled time. When he was forced to begin class late, he 

arranged for a coworker to supervise his students. He submitted a September 2018 

letter from a colleague who confirmed he asked her to cover his class on August 23, 

2018, so he could use the bathroom. 

31. 

Regarding the January 2020 “EdCon” staff development training, 

respondent denied being late or missing any part of the scheduled sessions. Rather, 

when he arrived, he saw and chatted with his former administrator. She told him he 

11 

could attend the daily sessions in any order and was not required to follow the 

schedule for Woodward personnel. He followed her guidance and attended with the 

District’s high school science teachers, with whom he was friendly. He denied telling 

Ms. Jamero he only saw “the tail end” of the keynote address. 

32. 

Regarding his behavior on November 2, 2020, respondent denied any 

wrongdoing. He noted the video excluded the first approximately two hours of his 

teaching that day. He explained, when the video began, he was not providing “direct 

instruction,” but giving students a chance to catch up on missing assignments or their 

morning work. He said the students could only see his face if they actively “switched 

over” to view his camera. Otherwise, the students’ screens would show the assignment. 

While the students worked, respondent was “just checking stuff in” and monitoring the 

online chat. 

33. 

Respondent acknowledged he was tired and slightly falling asleep. He 

explained he was not sleeping a lot at night. His brother died unexpectedly in early 

November 2019, and respondent was depressed and overwhelmed as the first 

anniversary approached. Additionally, in September he started taking a new medicine 

(olanzapine), which made him tired. At first, respondent’s doctor instructed him to take 

one tablet in the morning, but after respondent reported drowsiness, his doctor told 

him to take it in the evening instead. Finally, respondent explained he dozed off 

because he lacked stimulation in the warm and stuffy classroom. 

34. 

Regarding his conduct on February 4, 2021, respondent explained he 

opened his classroom late after lunch because he spilled a soda and was cleaning the 

mess. He heard knocking on the door but before he could open it, his classroom 

phone rang. He left the door area to answer the phone, then finally opened the door. 

As a joke, he was wearing a monkey mask over his regular mask, but it fell down. 

12 

When he bent to get it, his shirt lifted and showed his underwear. Later, he bought 

longer shirts so that would not happen again. He explained he was sweating as a side 

effect of a new medicine he recently started taking. He submitted a letter from the 

doctor who prescribed the medicine. The doctor wrote, “due to his current 

medications it [sic] causes him to sweat during the day.” According to the letter, 

respondent started seeing that doctor on March 11, 2021. Finally, respondent denied 

falling asleep while talking with Ms. Thomson and Dr. Alvarez. Rather, he was looking 

at the ground because he had nothing left to say to them. 

35. 

Respondent explained he carried the pocketknife for personal protection 

because he often walked to his car after dark. He brought the knife to school every day 

and used it “all the time” when students were not present. No one from the District 

had ever told him he could not have a knife on campus. 

36. 

Respondent had the lighters in his pocket because he smoked cigarettes. 

He never smoked on campus or on his breaks. Instead, he chewed nicotine gum. He 

sometimes used the lighters for science experiments. No one from the District ever 

warned him not to bring lighters on campus. 

37. 

Regarding the items found in his classroom in June 2021, respondent 

explained he cleaned out his class the first week of June, after the school year ended. 

His vape pen fell out of his pocket when he used a foam rolling device to stretch his 

back on the floor. He inadvertently left behind the other items found in his desk. The 

matches were for science experiments. He brought the buprenorphine-naloxone packs 

to school after a doctor prescribed them for back pain. He put them in his desk so they 

would not get hot in his pocket. He initially said the desk was locked, but on cross-

examination admitted it did not have a lock. Rather, the drawer was partially stuck and 

therefore difficult to open. He used white correction tape on the packs to hide any 

13 

information about what was in them. He has no knowledge of what substance was in 

the aluminum foil or its origins. 

38. 

Respondent has attended grief counseling and therapy regarding his 

brother’s death. He feels more emotionally stable and is sleeping better. He has seen 

the same doctor since summer 2022 and plans to continue seeing her. He now uses 

three medications that help him manage his depression and other health conditions. 

He submitted a letter from the doctor, which states she diagnosed him with a “severe 

episode of recurrent major depressive disorder and generalized anxiety disorder.” She 

concluded: 

I have completed my evaluation based on clinical interview. 

[Respondent] appears to be in stable condition and is 

compliant with medications. I do not believe that 

[respondent] is a danger to the public or as a teacher as he 

has never expressed any suicidal or homicidal ideations or 

presented with any psychotic symptoms. Finally, I do not 

believe [respondent] to have any current substance abuse 

disorders based on clinical interview and patient report. 

RESPONDENT’S WRITTEN REBUTTALS TO REPRIMANDS 

39. 

After most of the letters of warning or reprimand from the District, 

respondent explained his actions in writing. Regarding the September 2018 letter of 

warning for being late, respondent explained he needed to use the bathroom urgently 

because of a medical issue. He asked a coworker to watch his students, which she did. 

40. 

In response to his reprimand for being late on August 6, 2020, 

respondent explained his policy was to give students a five-minute grace period 

14 

before being marked tardy for class. He logged in at 8:03, which was within his own 

grace period, so he was not late. He also explained he communicated with parents, 

which explained why so many of his students were able to join the class session on 

time. Finally, he complained he was transferred to sixth grade on short notice, which 

did not provide enough time to resolve technological problems with his class roster. 

41. 

Regarding his reprimand in November 2020 for ongoing tardiness, he 

blamed “poor traffic control” at the school. Specifically, students were resuming in-

person instruction, and the roads and parking lot were jammed. He noted many other 

teachers were late for the same reasons. 

42. 

To explain his actions on February 4, 2021, respondent wrote he was 

sweating because he wore two masks and “hustled to the door” after cleaning up a 

spilled soda. He accidentally exposed his underwear when he briefly bent to pick up 

one of the masks he had dropped. Once class began, he believed the lesson was going 

well. He instructed the students who, in his opinion, were engaged with the material. 

43.  Once respondent was questioned in the office, he explained he was 

feeling fine. The SRO gave him field sobriety tests and opined he had a slow reaction 

time and constricted pupils. Respondent wrote in his response letter, “During this time, 

I did not feel that I had slurred speech or was off balance or any other signs of 

impairment. In fact, the two indicators that were sighted by the officer (slow reaction 

time and constricted pupils) can be explained by the fact that my pupils were 

constricted from the fluorescent lights in the office and I purposely slowed my reaction 

time as I felt I was nervous and would go too fast.” After more than an hour, 

respondent felt “utterly beat down” and put his head down as he waited for his 

parents to arrive. 

15 

CHARACTER EVIDENCE 

44. 

Respondent’s father, Mark Taylor, testified and submitted a letter of 

support. He was a teacher and administrator for 37 years. After respondent graduated 

from college, Mr. Taylor asked him to mentor a student with autism. Respondent 

connected exceptionally well with the student. Soon after, respondent decided to 

pursue his own teaching credential. 

45. 

After Mr. Taylor retired in 2010, he occasionally volunteered in 

respondent’s classroom. Based on those experiences, he believes respondent managed 

his classes well, monitored his students appropriately, and adjusted his instruction to 

his students’ needs. He also believes respondent is a responsible man with “a very 

strong moral compass.” 

46. 

After respondent’s brother died, respondent “wasn’t quite as spunky” or 

happy. Since seeing a new psychiatrist, respondent is “more on top, lucid, and happy” 

than he had been. 

47.  Mr. Taylor and his wife picked up respondent from Woodward on 

February 4, 2021. Mr. Taylor observed respondent’s energy seemed depleted. 

Respondent seemed “shell-shocked” and Mr. Taylor could tell “something was really 

wrong” with him. Respondent uncharacteristically cried. Mr. Taylor did not know any 

details, but could tell “something happened, and it wasn’t good.” 

48.  Mr. Taylor believes respondent has “learned quite a bit” and “had a wake-

up call.” Respondent has expressed remorse about his tardiness. Mr. Taylor did not 

share other specifics about how respondent’s attitude has changed. 

16 

49. 

Respondent submitted four additional character reference letters from 

family and friends. His mother noted he was deeply affected by his brother’s death. He 

was also isolated from COVID-19 restrictions and his life lacked normalcy. 

Respondent’s uncle, who taught elementary school for 30 years, believes he is an 

exemplary teacher. His uncle praised his open communication with parents, 

transparency in the classroom, outgoing personality, and classroom management 

skills. Respondent’s friend, who has been a high school teacher for 16 years, described 

him as honest, trustworthy compassionate, and true to his word. Respondent’s mentor, 

who has been a special education teacher for 35 years, praised his devotion to his 

students and to the teaching profession in general. 

Analysis 

50. 

Resolving this case is a two-step process. First, the factual disputes must 

be resolved to establish respondent’s conduct. Second, that conduct must be analyzed 

to determine whether it indicates unfitness to teach. 

RESPONDENT’S CONDUCT 

51. 

Complainant proved respondent was frequently late to campus over 

several months spanning multiple school years. He received multiple warnings and 

reprimands. 

52. 

Complainant proved that, for over approximately 30 minutes of 

classroom instruction on November 2, 2020, respondent fell asleep multiple times, 

drooled, was inattentive and unresponsive to student questions, and was unable to 

direct the students toward any recognizable objective. Respondent’s explanations for 

his behavior, including his reaction to prescription medication, is addressed in the 

section below regarding his fitness to teach. 

17 

53. 

Complainant also proved that on February 4, 2021, respondent was late 

reopening his classroom, was unkempt, and fell asleep while discussing his behavior 

afterwards. Ms. Thomson and Ms. del Mundo credibly testified respondent did not 

reopen his classroom after lunch until staff called the room and made a campus-wide 

announcement. They also credibly described respondent’s disheveled physical 

appearance when he opened the door. Ms. Thomson and Dr. Alvarez credibly 

described respondent’s behavior during their discussion with him in the office, 

including that he appeared to be falling asleep during their conversation. 

54. 

Finally, complainant proved respondent brought unauthorized items to 

campus multiple times. Specifically, he brought a knife and two lighters to campus on 

February 4, 2021, brought a vape pen into his classroom in June 2021, and kept 

matches and two packs of buprenorphine-naloxone sublingual films in his unlocked 

desk for an extended timeframe. 

FITNESS TO TEACH – MORRISON FACTORS 

55. 

In Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, the California 

Supreme Court concluded a teaching credential cannot be disciplined for immoral 

conduct, unprofessional conduct, or conduct involving moral turpitude “unless that 

conduct indicates that the [educator] is unfit to teach.” (Id. at p. 229.) The Court 

outlined factors to consider when determining whether conduct demonstrates 

unfitness to teach, and the Commission adopted those factors by enacting California 

Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80302. 

Liklifood of Adverse Effect on Students or Other Teachers 

56.  On the two occasions respondent had to be removed from his classroom, 

his behavior deprived his students of valuable learning time and forced the 

18 

administration to arrange for someone else to fill in for him. More than once when he 

was late, others had to step in to supervise his students. In addition, his conduct set a 

bad example and reflected poorly on him individually and on teachers generally. “A 

teacher [. . .] in the public school system is regarded by the public and pupils in the 

light of an exemplar, whose words and actions are likely to be followed by the children 

coming under [his] care and protection.” (Bd. of Education v. Swan (1953) 41 Cal.2d 

546, 552.) 

57.  Moreover, respondent endangered the students when he brought a 

knife, two lighters, matches, a vape pen, and dangerous prescription medication to his 

classroom. More alarmingly, he used correction tape to obscure the label on the 

buprenorphine-naloxone packets that warned children not to take the medicine and 

advised any who did would need emergency medical care. He then stored the packs in 

his unlocked desk. He said his desk was locked, but later admitted it was simply 

difficult to open. 

Type of Credential Held 

58. 

Respondent’s credential authorizes him to teach students in an 

impressionable and vulnerable age range. Therefore, it is even more imperative that he 

possess sound judgment and exemplify the type of behavior society wants students to 

emulate. 

Extenuating or Aggravating Circumstances 

59.  Neither the Education Code nor the Commission’s regulations define 

“extenuating circumstances.” However, a “mitigating factor” is “an event or 

circumstance which demonstrates that the public, schoolchildren and the profession 

would be adequately protected by a more lenient degree of adverse action or no 

19 

adverse action whatsoever.” (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80300, subd. (m).) Mitigating 

factors can include an individual’s emotional or physical difficulties, but only if he 

proves he no longer has such difficulties. (Id. at subd. (m)(3).) 

60.  Here, respondent partially attributed his behavior on November 2, 2020, 

to his depression and related insomnia regarding his brother’s death. However, to the 

extent those circumstances contributed to emotional or physical difficulties, he did not 

prove those difficulties no longer exist. He also attributed his behavior to his reaction 

to prescription medication. However, he began taking the subject medication weeks 

before November 2020. He did not prove using medication was a mitigating factor. 

61. 

Respondent also attributed his profuse sweating on February 4, 2021, to 

a new medication. That explanation was unpersuasive because he did not begin to see 

the doctor who prescribed that medication until the next month. Moreover, 

respondent’s conduct in February 2021 went well beyond merely sweating excessively. 

62.  On the other hand, an “aggravating factor” is “an event or circumstance 

which demonstrates that a greater degree of adverse action for an act of professional 

misconduct is needed to adequately protect the public, schoolchildren or the 

profession.” (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80300, subd. (b).) Here, respondent’s multiple 

acts of wrongdoing, which demonstrate a pattern of misconduct, constitute an 

aggravating factor. (Id. at subd. (b)(2).) Similarly, respondent had prior warnings and 

reprimands about arriving on time, being prepared to teach, and not bringing 

unauthorized items to school. (Id. at subd. (b)(6).) Finally, obscuring the warning label 

on dangerous medication that children could have accessed demonstrated an 

indifference to the consequences of his misconduct. (Id. at subd. (b)(5).) 

20 

Praiseworthiness or Blameworthiness of Respondent’s 

Motives 

63. 

Respondent bears the sole blame for his conduct. Although respondent 

attempted to justify and excuse being late, falling asleep in class, and bringing 

unauthorized items to school, he knew or should have known the rules governing his 

profession and behavior. 

Likelihood of Recurrence 

64. 

Respondent lacks insight into his misconduct and its causes. Without 

fully appreciating the reasons for his past misconduct, respondent cannot demonstrate 

he is unlikely to engage in similar misconduct in the future. Fully acknowledging the 

wrongfulness of past actions is an essential step towards rehabilitation. (Seide v. 

Committee of Bar Exam’rs (1989) 49 Cal.3d 933, 940.) Respondent has not achieved 

this essential step because, apart from being late occasionally, he does not believe he 

did anything wrong. As a result, any assurances that he would not repeat his 

misconduct are unpersuasive. 

Possible Chilling Effect on Constitutional Rights of Others 

65.  Neither party presented evidence about the possibility of a chilling effect 

on any person’s constitutional rights. Given the nature of the allegations, such an 

effect is unlikely. 

21 

Publicity or Notoriety of Respondent’s Conduct 

66. 

Respondent’s tardiness and classroom behavior conduct were not 

private. Rather, his students, more than one of their parents, and his colleagues knew 

of, and often were directly affected by, his behavior. 

Conclusion 

67. 

As discussed above, complainant proved respondent engaged in the 

misconduct alleged in the Accusation. Complainant further proved, after applying the 

Morrison factors, that respondent’s conduct indicates his unfitness to teach. Therefore, 

cause exists to discipline his credential. In light of the serious and repeated nature of 

his conduct, coupled with the lack of rehabilitation evidence, respondent’s credential 

should be revoked. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

1. 

Complainant bears the burden to prove the grounds for disciplining 

respondent’s credential by clear and convincing evidence to a reasonable certainty. 

(Daniels v. Dept. of Motor Vehicles (1983) 33 Cal.3d 532, 536; Gardener v. Comm’n. on 

Professional Competence (1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1036, 1039-1040.) “The courts have 

defined clear and convincing evidence as evidence which is so clear as to leave no 

substantial doubt and as sufficiently strong to command the unhesitating assent of 

every reasonable mind. [Citations.] It has been said that a preponderance calls for 

probability, while clear and convincing proof demands a high probability [citations].” 

(In re Terry D. (1978) 83 Cal.App.3d 890, 899; italics original.) 

22 

2. 

The California Supreme Court has recognized that the terms “immoral 

conduct” and “unprofessional conduct” substantially overlap one another and that 

conduct which constitutes one often includes the other. (See, Morrison v. State Bd. of 

Education, supra, 1 Cal.3d 214, 221, fn. 9.) “Unprofessional conduct” includes “‘that 

which violates the rules of ethical code of a profession or such conduct which is 

unbecoming a member of a profession in good standing.’” (Bd. of Education v. Swan, 

supra, 41 Cal.2d at p. 553; quoting, 66 Corpus Juris, p. 55.) In describing what 

constitutes “immoral conduct” within the context of the Education Code, the court in 

Board of Education of San Francisco Unified School District v. Weiland (1960) 179 

Cal.App.2d 808, said: 

In Orloff v. Los Angeles Turf Club, 36 Cal.2d 734, at page 

740 [227 P.2d 449], the Supreme Court quotes with 

approval the following statement from Words and Phrases, 

permanent edition, volume 20, pages 159-160: “The term 

‘immoral’ has been defined generally as that which is hostile 

to the welfare of the general public and contrary to good 

morals. Immorality has not been confined to sexual matters, 

but includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or 

indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; 

or as willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral 

indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the 

community, and as an inconsiderate attitude toward good 

order and the public welfare.” 

(Id., at p. 811.) 

23 

3. 

The court in San Diego Unified School District v. Commission on 

Professional Competence (2011) 194 Cal.App.4th 1454, said the following about the 

definition of immoral or unprofessional conduct: 

Moreover, the definition of immoral or unprofessional 

conduct must be considered in conjunction with the unique 

position of public school teachers, upon whom are imposed 

“responsibilities and limitations on freedom of action which 

do not exist in regard to other callings.” [Citation.] 

(Id., at p. 1466.) 

4. 

And the following has been said about the analysis for determining 

whether particular conduct constitutes sufficient cause for taking adverse action 

against a credential: 

Goldsmith v. Board of Education, 66 Cal.App. 157, 168 [225 

P. 783], quoted in Board of Education v. Swan, 41 Cal.2d 

546, 553-554 [261 P.2d 261], found that the standards for 

judging the propriety of a teacher’s conduct, and the extent 

to which that conduct may be the basis for the revocation 

of a credential, involves many aspects. “ . . . the teacher is 

entrusted with the custody of children and their high 

preparation for useful life. His habits, his speech, his good 

name, his cleanliness, the wisdom and propriety of his 

unofficial utterances, his associations, all are involved. His 

ability to inspire children and to govern them, his power as 

24 

a teacher, and the character for which he stands are matters 

of major concern in a teacher’s selection and retention.” 

(Moser v. State Bd. of Education (1972) 22 Cal.App.3d 988, 991.) 

5. 

The Commission may discipline a credential based on the holder’s 

unprofessional conduct. (Ed. Code, § 44421.) As discussed above, complainant 

established by clear and convincing evidence that respondent engaged in 

unprofessional conduct when he was habitually late to work, was unfit to teach, and 

brought dangerous and unauthorized items to school. On that basis, cause exists to 

discipline respondent’s credential pursuant to Education Code section 44421. 

6. 

The Commission may discipline a credential based on the holder’s 

immoral conduct. (Ed. Code, § 44421.) As discussed above, complainant established by 

clear and convincing evidence that respondent engaged in immoral conduct when was 

unfit to teach and brought dangerous and unauthorized items to school. On that basis, 

cause exists to discipline his credential pursuant to Education Code section 44421. 

7. 

The Commission may discipline a credential based on the holder’s 

evident unfitness for service. (Ed. Code, § 44421.) As discussed above, complainant 

established by clear and convincing evidence that respondent was habitually late to 

work, was unfit to teach, and brought dangerous and unauthorized items to school, all 

of which collectively demonstrated his evident unfitness for service. On that basis, 

cause exists to discipline respondent’s credential pursuant to Education Code section 

44421. 

8. 

The Commission may discipline a credential “for any cause that would 

have warranted the denial of an application for a credential or the renewal thereof.” 

(Ed. Code, § 44421.) An application for a credential may be denied if the applicant “has 

25 

committed any act involving moral turpitude.” (Ed. Code, § 44345, subd. (e).) As 

discussed above, complainant established by clear and convincing evidence that 

respondent committed acts involving moral turpitude when he was unfit to teach and 

brought dangerous and unauthorized items to school. On that basis, cause exists to 

discipline his credential pursuant to Education Code section 44421, as that statute 

relates to Education Code section 44345, subdivision (e). 

9. 

Cause exists to discipline respondent’s credential for the reasons 

explained above, both individually and collectively. When all the evidence is 

considered, there was insufficient evidence of rehabilitation or respondent’s continued 

fitness to perform the duties authorized under his credential, even on a probationary 

basis. Therefore, his credential should be revoked. 

ORDER 

The Clear Multiple Subject Teaching Credential, and all other credentials, 

certificates, and authorizations issued to respondent Joshua Zarek Taylor by the 

Commission, is REVOKED. 

DATE: December 5, 2023

SEAN GAVIN 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings 

26 

Sean Gavin (Dec 5, 2023 08:20 PST) 
 
 
