BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Accusation Against: 

CHRISTOPHER THOMAS SINGER, Respondent 

Case No. 2-347158659 

OAH No. 2023080079 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Timothy J. Aspinwall, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative 

Hearings (OAH), State of California, heard this matter by videoconference on 

November 15, 2023, from Sacramento, California. 

Stephanie Alamo-Latif, Deputy Attorney General, represented Mary Vixie Sandy, 

Ed.D. (complainant), Executive Director of the California Commission on Teacher 

Credentialing (Commission). 

David R. Wiksell, Attorney at Law, represented Christopher Thomas Singer 

(respondent), who was present. 

Evidence was received, the record closed, and the matter submitted for decision 

on November 15, 2023. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Background and Jurisdictional Matters 

1. 

On January 19, 2022, the Commission issued a Preliminary Single Subject 

Teaching Credential (Credential) to respondent. Respondent’s Credential will expire on 

February 1, 2027, unless renewed. On March 5, 2020, the Commission issued a 

Certificate of Clearance (Certificate) to respondent. Respondent’s Certificate will expire 

on April 1, 2025, unless renewed. 

2. 

On June 12, 2023, complainant, acting in her official capacity, caused to 

be filed the Accusation in this matter. Complainant seeks to revoke all credentials, 

certificates, and authorizations issued to respondent, based on two misdemeanor 

convictions and respondent’s misconduct underlying those convictions, as set forth 

below. Respondent timely filed a notice of defense, and this hearing followed. 

Respondent’s DUI Conviction and Underlying Misconduct 

3. 

On August 24, 2021, in Butte County Superior Court, respondent was 

convicted on his no contest plea of misdemeanor driving under the influence (DUI) of 

alcohol, with a blood alcohol content (BAC) of 0.08 percent or higher, in violation of 

Vehicle Code section 23152, subdivision (b). Respondent also admitted to having a 

BAC of 0.15 percent or higher, specifically 0.19 percent, as a special allegation within 

the meaning of Vehicle Code section 23578. The court placed respondent on informal 

probation for three years, with terms and conditions including that he complete a 

Level I DUI program and pay fines and fees. 

4. 

The circumstances leading to respondent’s conviction were that on 

March 26, 2021, at approximately 10:00 p.m., a California Highway Patrol (CHP) officer 

2 

stopped respondent as he drove on a surface street because respondent’s pickup truck 

did not have an operating rear license plate light. When the CHP officer approached 

respondent in his pickup truck, the officer noticed a strong odor of alcoholic 

beverages, and that respondent’s eyes were bloodshot and his speech was slurred. The 

officer asked respondent to perform field sobriety tests, which he failed to perform 

satisfactorily. The officer administered a breath test, which showed respondent had a 

BAC of 0.19 percent. Respondent was then transported to Butte County Jail. 

Respondent’s Firearm Conviction and Underlying Misconduct 

5. 

On July 7, 2022, in Butte County Superior Court, respondent was 

convicted on his no contest plea of misdemeanor discharging a firearm with gross 

negligence, in violation of Penal Code section 246.3, subdivision (a). The court placed 

respondent on formal probation for three years, with terms and conditions including 

that he refrain from the use or possession of alcohol or non-prescribed controlled 

substances, enroll in and complete a Batterers Treatment Program, and pay fines and 

fees. 

6. 

The circumstances leading to respondent’s conviction, as set forth in a 

Butte County Sheriff’s Office report, are that on February 22, 2022, at approximately 

10:20 p.m., a Butte County deputy sheriff was dispatched to the residence respondent 

shares with his spouse Brianda Bastida (Ms. Bastida) and their infant daughter. Ms. 

Bastida had called 911 and stated that respondent had armed himself with a nine-

millimeter (mm) pistol, made threats to kill himself, and fired a bullet into the floor of 

their residence. 

7. 

When the deputy sheriff arrived at the residence, Ms. Bastida came 

outside carrying their daughter. Respondent eventually exited the residence after 

3 

being instructed to do so multiple times through a loudspeaker, and was arrested 

without further incident. 

8. 

The deputy sheriff interviewed Ms. Bastida and respondent separately. 

Ms. Bastida said that she and respondent usually get along except when he drinks 

alcohol. That evening they had gotten into an argument about respondent’s drinking 

and being drunk. At one point respondent said something about getting his gun and 

shooting himself. As Ms. Bastida sat in the living room holding their daughter, 

respondent retrieved a pistol from a small safe in their bedroom. He then walked into 

another room and fired a single bullet into the floor. She believed respondent fired the 

gun to scare her. She did not believe respondent was ever going to shoot himself. 

9. 

The deputy sheriff confronted respondent with what Ms. Bastida had told 

him. He shared that he knew respondent had not fired his pistol in the backyard, as 

respondent told another deputy sheriff at the time of his arrest. Respondent told the 

deputy sheriff that he was “just being irresponsible,” that he had “no intentions to 

harm anyone,” and that he “wasn’t trying to scare her.” He also stated that he knows 

firearms and alcohol do not mix. 

10. 

The sheriff’s deputies retrieved respondent’s nine mm caliber handgun 

and took photographs of a single bullet hole in the floor outside the residence 

bathroom. Respondent was transported to jail, where he submitted a breath test. The 

test registered a BAC of 0.16 percent. 

4 

Respondent’s Evidence 

RESPONDENT’S TESTIMONY AND WRITTEN STATEMENTS 

11. 

Respondent testified at hearing and submitted two written statements. 

One is dated November 1, 2022, addressed to the Commission. The other is addressed 

to “whom it may concern” and dated July 18, 2023. Respondent’s testimony and 

written statements are summarized below. 

12. 

Regarding the February 22, 2022 incident, respondent started drinking 

alcohol in the backyard in the early afternoon. When his spouse, Ms. Bastida, returned 

home with their daughter, she became upset with respondent because he was sitting 

in the backyard intoxicated and drinking alone. Respondent later came into the house. 

He was highly intoxicated. He remembered that when he returned from shooting his 

handgun the previous day, he had not put it in the gun safe as usual. Instead, he had 

put it in a more accessible locker in the master bedroom. In his intoxicated state, he 

took his handgun from the locker in the master bedroom, and walked to the extra 

bedroom where the gun safe is located. 

13.  Ms. Bastida was sitting on the living room sofa with their daughter when 

he walked past her with the handgun. She asked him what he was doing, he told her 

“don’t worry about it” because he was still in a bad mood from their argument about 

his alcohol consumption. When he got to the extra bedroom, he put a magazine of 

bullets in the gun, then pulled back the slide to put a bullet in the firing chamber. He 

then took the magazine out of the handgun and pulled back the slide again, intending 

to eject the bullet from the firing chamber. He pointed the gun at the floor and pulled 

the trigger, attempting to “dry fire” the gun to ensure there was no bullet in the firing 

chamber. In fact, there was a bullet in the firing chamber because respondent had not 

5 

successfully ejected it. Instead of a “dry fire,” respondent accidentally shot a bullet into 

the floor. 

14. 

Respondent acknowledged this would not have occurred if he had not 

made the irresponsible decision to handle a firearm while intoxicated. He has not 

consumed any alcohol since his arrest on February 22, 2022, and he no longer 

possesses any firearms. 

15. 

Respondent has complied with probation imposed as a consequence of 

his 2022 conviction, including completion of a 52-week Batterers Treatment Program. 

He attended the program diligently and had no absences. The program helped him 

understand the destructive role of alcohol in family dynamics. Beyond this, respondent 

has not participated in any alcohol abuse counseling, nor has he attended any support 

groups focused on alcohol or drug abuse. 

16. 

Regarding respondent’s 2021 DUI arrest and conviction, he completed 

the court-ordered Level I DUI program in December 2021. However, he acknowledged 

that he “did not take proper steps” to address his alcohol problems, as evidenced by 

his continued consumption of alcohol and his 2022 conviction. 

17. 

Respondent has been employed as a teacher at a K-12 charter school in 

Orland, California, since October 2022. He teaches Spanish, English language 

development, and independent study. The possibility of working in the teaching 

profession is something he had long considered. He finally obtained a teaching 

credential in 2022. 

6 

BRIANDA BASTIDA’S TESTIMONY AND WRITTEN STATEMENTS 

18.  Ms. Bastida testified at hearing and submitted two written statements. 

One is dated March 22, 2023, addressed to the Commission. The other is addressed to 

“whom it may concern” and dated November 1, 2022. Ms. Bastida’s testimony and 

written statements are summarized below. 

19.  Ms. Bastida and respondent have been married for approximately nine 

years. They have a two-year-old daughter. Ms. Bastida is happy to be married to 

respondent. Respondent has never been physically or emotionally abusive to her, and 

she has never known him to be an aggressive person in any way. Ms. Bastida does not 

work outside the home. She and their daughter rely upon respondent’s income as a 

teacher. 

20. 

To Ms. Bastida’s observation, respondent definitely has a passion for 

teaching. She can see the excitement in his eyes when he talks about his job as a 

teacher. In her view, respondent “always had a mindset of being a professional and 

being able to teach what he knows . . . .” She believes “100 percent that [respondent’s] 

passion is teaching.” 

21.  With respect to the February 22, 2022 incident, she and respondent got 

into an argument because he had been drinking alcohol again. Later in the evening, 

she saw respondent get his handgun from their bedroom. She was sitting on the sofa 

in the living room holding their daughter. He did not threaten her with the gun or 

point it in her direction. She did not see him handling the gun but heard him fire a 

shot. She was frightened and upset, so she called 911. She does not recall telling the 

police or the 911 operator that respondent threatened to kill himself. 

7 

22.  Ms. Bastida believes respondent is an alcoholic. She last saw him drink 

alcohol on February 22, 2022. 

DANIEL LA BAR’S TESTIMONY AND LETTERS OF SUPPORT 

23.  Mr. La Bar testified at hearing and submitted two letters he wrote to the 

Commission. Mr. La Bar’s testimony and written statements are summarized below. 

24.  Mr. La Bar is employed as the principle of a K-12 charter school in 

Orland, where respondent has worked as a teacher since October 2022. Mr. La Bar 

participated in respondent’s hiring process. Respondent was forthright about his DUI 

conviction and pending gun charge in his employment application and throughout the 

hiring process. Respondent kept the human resources department and district 

administration informed as the case progressed, including when he was convicted and 

placed on probation based on the gun charge. 

25. 

Respondent is an asset to the educational community. Mr. La Bar wrote 

to the Commission the following: 

As his supervisor, [respondent] has exceeded my 

expectations regarding job performance. He brings with 

him a level of integrity, honesty, and authenticity. . . . 

[Respondent] has acted with the utmost respect as well as 

physical and emotional safety in terms of working with his 

students, their families, and his colleagues. I have no 

concerns regarding his supervision of enrolled students. 

26. 

Respondent has been open and honest regarding his problems with 

alcohol. He appears to have these challenges under control. 

8 

ADDITIONAL LETTERS OF SUPPORT 

27. 

Respondent submitted six additional letters of support from family 

members, supervisors when he served as a student teacher, and the superintendent of 

the school district in which he now serves as a teacher. The letters corroborate 

respondent’s own stated commitment to teaching and express a high regard for his 

aptitudes and work ethic. The letter from Brian Bentz, Superintendent of the Glenn 

County Office of Education, states the following: 

[Respondent] has been a model employee, he is intelligent, 

hard-working and works well with staff, students and 

administration and he is committed to serving this 

community. 

I realize [respondent] has had some previous issues but was 

forthcoming with his faults . . . . 

Again, I believe [respondent] is a quality teacher and an 

upstanding human being. I understand he has a difficult 

past, but that is being rectified, and I believe he has a lot to 

offer the teaching profession. 

Analysis 

28. 

Respondent testified credibly and candidly regarding his problems with 

alcohol, and the incidents leading to his arrests and convictions. Ms. Bastida was 

credible in her account of events. Any inconsistencies among their various written and 

oral statements are not significant with respect to the central issue in this matter: 

whether respondent is fit to serve as a teacher. 

9 

29. 

Respondent’s convictions and his underlying misconduct are wholly 

attributable to his alcohol consumption. He had a BAC of 0.19 percent when he was 

arrested for DUI, and a BAC of 0.16 percent when he was arrested for grossly negligent 

discharge of a firearm. Respondent has not consumed alcohol since he was arrested in 

February 2022. He concedes he is an alcoholic. But he has not attended any counseling 

or support groups focused on alcohol or drug abuse. 

30. 

The central concern regarding respondent’s fitness to teach is not the 

quality of his teaching or his interactions with student, parents, and colleagues. The 

evidence is clear and persuasive that he excels in these areas. The concern is whether 

he is stable in his recovery from alcohol abuse. Should he relapse, all his progress as a 

teacher could be lost, and the welfare of students put at risk. 

31. 

For these reasons, it is necessary to impose discipline that will ensure 

respondent’s continued sobriety. This necessarily includes terms and conditions of 

probation, as set forth in the Legal Conclusions below. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

Burden and Standard of Proof 

1. 

Complainant has the burden of proving cause for adverse action by clear 

and convincing evidence to a reasonable certainty. (Ettinger v. Bd. of Medical Quality 

Assurance (1982) 135 Cal.App.3d 583, 855–856.) Clear and convincing evidence 

requires proof that is so clear as to leave no substantial doubt and that is sufficiently 

strong to command the unhesitating assent of every reasonable mind. (In re Marriage 

of Brooks (2008) 169 Cal.App.4th 176, 190.) 

10 

Jurisdiction and Applicable Law 

2. 

Pursuant to Education Code section 44000 et seq., and California Code of 

Regulations, title 5, commencing with section 80001, the Commission is responsible 

for credentialing teachers in public schools in California, including issuing credentials, 

and taking adverse action against applicants and credential holders. (Statutory 

references are to the Education Code unless otherwise specified.) 

3. 

Section 44421 authorizes the Commission to take adverse action against 

an individual’s teaching credential for, among other specified causes, unprofessional 

conduct, evident unfitness for service, immoral conduct, acts of moral turpitude, or for 

any cause that would warrant denial of an application for a credential. Section 44345, 

subdivision (e), allows the Commission to deny an application of one who has 

committed an act involving moral turpitude. 

Alleged Causes for Adverse Action 

UNPROFESSIONAL CONDUCT 

4. 

Unprofessional conduct in the teaching profession has been defined as 

that which violates the rules or ethical code of the profession or is unbecoming of a 

member of the profession in good standing. (Bd. of Ed. of City of Los Angeles v. Swan 

(1953) 41 Cal.2d 546, 553, overruled on other grounds by Bekiaris v. Bd. of Ed. (1972) 6 

Cal.3d 575.) 

5. 

Based on the Factual Findings and Legal Conclusions as a whole, 

complainant established by clear and convincing evidence that respondent committed 

unprofessional conduct when he drove while under the influence of alcohol and 

discharged a firearm in a grossly negligent manner. For these reasons, and based on 

11 

the Factual Findings and Legal Conclusions as a whole, cause exists for adverse action 

against respondent’s credentials pursuant to section 44421. 

EVIDENT UNFITNESS FOR SERVICE 

6. 

“Evident unfitness for service” means a teacher is clearly not fit, not 

adapted to or unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of temperamental defects 

or inadequacies. (Woodland Joint Unified School Dist. v. Com. on Professional 

Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444.) “Unlike ‘unprofessional conduct,’ 

‘evident unfitness for service’ connotes a fixed character trait, presumably not 

remediable merely on receipt of notice that one’s conduct fails to meet the 

expectations of the employing school district.” (Ibid.) 

7. 

Based on the Factual Findings and Legal Conclusions as a whole, 

complainant did not establish by clear and convincing evidence that respondent is 

evidently unfit for service, especially given respondent’s record of employment and 

insight into his misconduct in this matter. Based on the evidence as a whole, 

respondent is fit to serve as a teacher. 

IMMORAL CONDUCT 

8. 

The term “immoral” has been defined generally as “that which is hostile 

to the welfare of the general public and contrary to good morals. . . . [It] includes 

conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, 

dissoluteness; or as willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral indifference 

to the opinions of respectable members of the community, and as an inconsiderate 

attitude toward good order and the public welfare.” (Bd. of Ed. of San Francisco 

Unified School Dist. v. Weiland (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811.) 

12 

9. 

Based on the Factual Findings and Legal Conclusions as a whole, 

complainant established by clear and convincing evidence that respondent engaged in 

immoral conduct when he drove while under the influence of alcohol and discharged a 

firearm in a grossly negligent manner. For these reasons, and based on the Factual 

Findings and Legal Conclusions as a whole, cause exists for adverse action against 

respondent’s credentials pursuant to section 44421. 

ACTS OF MORAL TURPITUDE 

10. 

“Moral turpitude” has been defined as “everything done contrary to 

justice, honesty, modesty or good morals.” (Rice v. Alcoholic Beverage Appeals Bd. 

(1979) 89 Cal.App.3d 30, 36.) An act involves moral turpitude if it involves a serious 

breach of a duty owed to another or to society. (In re Stuart K. Lesansky (2001) 25 

Cal.4th 11, 16.) 

11. 

Based on the Factual Findings and Legal Conclusions as a whole, 

complainant established by clear and convincing evidence that respondent committed 

acts of moral turpitude when he drove while under the influence of alcohol and 

discharged a firearm in a grossly negligent manner. For these reasons, and based on 

the Factual Findings and Legal Conclusions as a whole, cause exists for adverse action 

against respondent’s credentials pursuant to sections 44421 and 44345, subdivision 

(e). 

Fitness to Teach 

12. 

In Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, the California 

Supreme Court concluded that a teaching credential cannot be disciplined for immoral 

conduct, unprofessional conduct, or conduct involving moral turpitude “unless that 

conduct indicates that the [educator] is unfit to teach.” (Id. at p. 229.) The Court 

13 

outlined factors to consider when determining whether an educator’s conduct 

demonstrates unfitness to teach, which have been codified in California Code of 

Regulations, title 5, section 80302, subdivision (a). The criteria are as follows: (1) the 

likelihood of adverse effects on students, fellow teachers, or the educational 

community; (2) the proximity or remoteness in time of the misconduct; (3) the type of 

credential held by respondent; (4) extenuating or aggravating circumstances; 

(5) praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of motives; (6) likelihood of recurrence; 

(7) the extent to which disciplinary action may chill or have an adverse impact upon 

the exercise of constitutional rights among teachers or other persons involved; 

(8) publicity or notoriety of respondent’s misconduct. 

13. 

The Morrison factors are considered, as follows. There is no evidence that 

respondent’s past misconduct had or is likely to have an adverse effect on students or 

others in the educational community. Respondent’s misconduct is more proximate 

than remote in time. Respondent’s single subject teaching credential puts him near 

impressionable students, who would be vulnerable if he were to engage in further 

misconduct or have an alcohol relapse. Aggravating circumstances exist to the extent 

respondent engaged in multiple acts of wrongdoing resulting in two misdemeanor 

convictions, and demonstrated indifference to the consequences of his conduct by 

driving and handling a firearm while intoxicated. Respondent’s separate acts of 

misconduct are blameworthy in that they followed from his choices on separate 

occasions to drive on a public road and handle a firearm after drinking excessive 

amounts of alcohol. Respondent is unlikely to engage in similar misconduct again, so 

long as he remains sober. Disciplinary action in this matter will not have an adverse 

impact upon anyone’s exercise of constitutional rights. There is no evidence of 

publicity or notoriety of respondent’s misconduct. 

14 

14.  On balance, application of the Morrison factors demonstrates a nexus 

between respondent’s misconduct and his fitness to teach. However, they do not 

indicate respondent is unfit to maintain his credentials and continue teaching, 

provided he remains sober and free of alcohol or other intoxicating substances. 

Disposition 

15. 

Licensing disciplinary matters like this are not designed to punish an 

individual. (Camacho v. Youde (1979) 95 Cal.App.3d 161, 165.) Rather, a licensing 

agency should be primarily concerned with protecting the public. (Fahmy v. Medical 

Bd. of California (1995) 38 Cal.App.4th 810, 817.) In this matter, public protection will 

be achieved by imposing a three-year term of probation that will allow the 

Commission to monitor respondent’s conduct and to ensure respondent maintains his 

sobriety. 

ORDER 

The Preliminary Five-Year Single Subject Teaching Credential and the Certificate 

of Clearance issued to respondent Christopher Thomas Singer are revoked. However, 

the revocation is stayed, and respondent is placed on probation for three years from 

the effective date of this decision and order on the following terms and conditions. 

SEVERABILITY CLAUSE: Each condition of probation contained herein is a 

separate and distinct condition. If any condition of probation is declared 

unenforceable in whole, in part, or to any extent, the remaining conditions of 

probation, and each of them, shall not be affected. Each condition of probation shall 

separately be valid and enforceable to the fullest extent permitted by law. 

15 

1. 

NEW CREDENTIALS SUBJECT TO ORDER: Any new credential issued by 

the Commission to respondent during the period of probation shall be subject to the 

same terms and conditions of probation, as set forth herein. 

2. 

OBEY ALL LAWS: Respondent shall obey all federal, state, and local laws 

and regulations, including, but not limited to, the statutes and regulations of the 

Commission. 

Except for minor traffic infractions, within 72 hours of any incident resulting in 

respondent’s arrest, the filing of any criminal charges, or citation issued, respondent 

shall submit a full and detailed description of the incident to the Commission. For 

purposes of this condition, a “minor traffic infraction” includes only traffic violations 

which are punishable by a maximum of $400, and do not subject the offender to 

incarceration or probation. 

3. 

COMPLIANCE WITH PROBATION: Respondent shall fully comply with the 

terms and conditions of this order and cooperate with representatives of the 

Commission in its monitoring and investigation of his compliance. Any credentials 

issued to respondent during the period of probation shall be subject to the conditions 

contained herein. 

4. 

COOPERATION WITH COMMISSION: During the period of probation, 

respondent shall be available for interviews with the Commission in person or by 

telephone upon reasonable notice. 

5. 

MAINTAIN CURRENT CONTACT INFORMATION: Within seven days of the 

effective date of this decision and order, respondent shall notify the Commission of his 

current mailing address and phone number where voicemail messages may be left. 

16 

Respondent will notify the Commission in writing of any change of mailing address or 

residence within 10 days of such change. 

6. 

NOTIFICATION OF EMPLOYER: Within five days of the effective date of 

this decision and order, respondent shall provide a true and correct copy of this 

decision, together with a true and correct copy of the Accusation in this matter, to 

respondent’s employer, if any, and to respondent’s immediate supervisor at that 

employer. Within five days of complying with this notification requirement, respondent 

shall submit proof of compliance to the Commission. 

If respondent changes employment at any time during probation, respondent 

shall again comply with this notification requirement within seven days of accepting 

new employment and shall again submit proof of compliance to the Commission 

within five days of complying with this notification requirement. 

7. 

ABSTAIN FROM DRUGS AND ALCOHOL: Respondent shall completely 

abstain from the possession or use of alcohol, controlled substances, illicit drugs, or 

associated paraphernalia, except when possessed or used pursuant to a legitimate 

prescription. Any possession or use of alcohol, controlled substances, illicit drugs, or 

associated paraphernalia for which a legitimate prescription has not been issued, shall 

be considered a violation of probation. 

8. 

DRUG AND ALCOHOL TESTING: Respondent, at his expense, shall 

participate in a random, biological fluid testing or a drug screening program, approved 

by the Commission, for the detection of banned substances, including alcohol, 

controlled substances, and dangerous drugs. The length of time and frequency will be 

subject to approval by the Commission. Respondent is responsible for keeping the 

Commission informed of his current telephone number at all times. Respondent shall 

17 

also ensure that messages may be left at the telephone number when he is not 

available and ensure that reports are submitted directly by the testing agency to the 

Commission, as directed. Any confirmed positive finding shall be reported immediately 

to the Commission by the program and shall be considered a violation of probation. 

By no later than 30 days after the effective date of this decision and order, 

respondent shall have completed all the following tasks: enrolled and registered with 

an approved drug and alcohol testing vendor; provided that vendor with any 

documentation, and any information necessary for payment by respondent; 

commenced testing protocols, including all required contacts with the testing vendor 

to determine testing dates; and begun testing. At all times, respondent shall fully 

cooperate with the testing vendor, and the Commission or its designee, with regard to 

enrollment, registration, and payment for, and compliance with, testing. Any failure to 

cooperate shall be considered a violation of probation. 

Prior to any vacation or other period of absence from the area where the 

approved testing vendor provides services, respondent shall seek and receive approval 

from the Commission or its designee to use an alternate testing vendor to ensure 

testing can occur. Upon approval, respondent shall enroll and register with the 

approved alternate drug testing vendor, provide to that alternate vendor any 

documentation required by the vendor, including any necessary payment by 

respondent. During the period of absence from the area, respondent shall commence 

testing protocols with the alternate vendor, including required daily contacts with the 

testing vendor to determine whether testing is required, and required testing. Any 

failure to timely seek or receive approval from the Commission or its designee, or to 

timely enroll and register with, timely commence testing protocols with, or timely 

18 

undergo testing with, the alternate testing vendor, shall be considered a violation of 

probation. 

9. 

THERAPY OR COUNSELING: Commencing no later than 30 days after the 

effective date of this decision and order, respondent shall at his expense, participate in 

therapy or counseling with a licensed psychologist or therapist competent to treat 

alcohol and substance use disorders, at intervals recommended by the psychologist or 

therapist, until such time as the Commission releases him from this requirement, and 

only upon recommendation of the treating psychologist or therapist. 

10. 

ATTENDANCE AND PARTICIPATION IN GROUP SUPPORT MEETINGS: 

commencing no later than 30 days after the effective date of this decision and order, 

respondent shall begin attendance at an addictive behavior support group (e.g., 

Alcoholics Anonymous, or other similar support group). Respondent shall attend at 

least one meeting of the support group per week for the duration of probation. 

Verified documentation of attendance shall be submitted by respondent every three 

months or at intervals required by the Commission. 

11. 

VIOLATION OF PROBATION: The Commission shall retain jurisdiction 

over respondent during the period of probation. If respondent violates any term or 

condition of this order, after giving him written notice and an opportunity to be heard 

on the issue of any violation of probation, the Commission may set aside the stay 

order and impose the revocation of respondent’s credentials. If an accusation or 

petition to revoke probation is filed against respondent during probation, the 

probation period shall automatically be extended until a final decision is made on the 

accusation or petition. 

19 

12. 

COMPLETION OF PROBATION: Upon successful completion of the terms 

of this probation, respondent’s credentials shall be fully restored. 

DATE: November 30, 2023

TIMOTHY J. ASPINWALL  

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings 

20 

 
 
