BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Accusation against: 

EDWARD DANIEL RONQUILLO, Respondent 

Agency Case No. 2-266287340 

OAH No. 2023020385 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Danette C. Brown, Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings 

(OAH), State of California, heard this matter by videoconference on June 26 and 27, 

2023, from Sacramento, California. 

Steve J. Pyun, Deputy Attorney General, represented complainant Mary Vixie 

Sandy, Ed.D, Executive Director of the California Commission on Teacher Credentialing 

(Commission). 

Edward Daniel Ronquillo (respondent) appeared and represented himself. 

Evidence was received, the record closed, and the matter submitted for decision 

on June 27, 2023. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Jurisdictional Matters 

1. 

On January 12, 2016, the Commission issued respondent a Preliminary 

Education Specialist Instruction Credential (preliminary credential). The preliminary 

credential expires on September 1, 2023, unless renewed or revoked. On June 11, 

2020, the Commission issued respondent a Clear Education Specialist Instruction 

Credential (clear credential). The clear credential expires on July 1, 2025, unless 

renewed or revoked. 

2. 

Respondent previously held the following credentials: (1) a Certificate of 

Clearance issued on November 5, 2015, and expired on December 1, 2020; and (2) a 

District Intern Credential issued on August 15, 2016, and expired on September 1, 

2019. 

3. 

On January 19, 2023, complainant signed and thereafter filed the instant 

Accusation against respondent, alleging cause to revoke all credentials, certificates, 

and authorizations issued to respondent based on unprofessional conduct and evident 

unfitness for service based upon respondent’s interactions with Coalinga-Huron 

Unified School District (District) staff. 

4. 

In aggravation, complainant alleged that a greater degree of adverse 

action is needed to protect the public, schoolchildren, or the profession, because 

respondent’s misconduct: (1) evidences multiple acts of wrongdoing, demonstrating a 

pattern of misconduct; (2) significantly harmed a child trusted to his care, the public, or 

educational system; and (3) demonstrated an indifference toward the consequences of 

his misconduct, and had prior notice, warnings or reprimands for similar conduct. 

2 

Complainant’s Evidence 

NOTICE OF DISMISSAL AND STATEMENT OF REASONS 

5. 

On February 10, 2021, the District gave formal notice to respondent that 

he was being dismissed from his position as a Huron Middle School (HMS) teacher, 

effective March 14, 2021, for dishonesty and evident unfitness of service. Lori 

Villanueva, District Superintendent, issued a Notice of Dismissal and Statement of 

Reasons in Support of Dismissal (Notice) of respondent. The Notice contained the 

factual allegations in support of respondent’s dismissal set forth below. 

6. 

Respondent, a probationary certificated employee of the District 

assigned to HMS, engaged in “questionable behavior that fostered negative working 

relationships between himself and other [HMS] staff members.” Those members 

expressed their discomfort in continuing to work with respondent because his 

behavior caused them to fear for their own safety. 

Encounters with Teacher EO 

7. 

On October 21, 2020, respondent became angry with teacher EO after he 

requested that she come to his classroom to speak with him about people calling him 

names. EO asked respondent who had called him names and when it occurred. 

Respondent became angry, stating, “No, I will not tell you, but since you do not know 

anything, you can go because I have a lot of planning and meetings to do.” 

Respondent’s strange behavior towards EO continued for three days. He overtly 

ignored EO each time she greeted him with a “Good morning” or “How are you 

doing?” Respondent ignored EO and walked away from her. After the third incident of 

respondent ignoring EO, she went to respondent’s classroom to ask why he ignored 

her. Respondent became enraged, stating: 

3 

We are all aware of our actions. If you have done something 

wrong, then you would know what you have done. If you 

think you have done something bad, then you are the only 

one that is aware of what you have done.”  

8. 

EO observed respondent’s hands shaking in anger as he “stared through” 

her. EO feared respondent was about to strike her. EO tried to avoid respondent after 

this incident. 

Encounters with Teacher RR 

9. 

In mid/late October 2020, respondent told teacher RR that he felt he was 

“spied” on during Zoom meetings. Respondent asked RR if he let any other individuals 

besides assigned students and staff participate in Zoom meetings. RR stated he did 

not. Respondent persisted, making RR feel that respondent was accusing him of 

allowing unauthorized individuals into Zoom meetings to spy on respondent, or that 

RR knew of a plot to spy on him during Zoom meetings. 

10. 

Several times during the 2020-21 school year, respondent loudly banged 

on RR’s classroom door during student instruction. RR opened the door each time, 

assuming respondent’s loud and intense knocking and interruptions were urgent. 

When RR did so, respondent asked mundane questions. RR described respondent’s 

behavior as agitated and intense, always seeming to be in a hurry. 

Encounter with Teacher TT 

11.  On November 2, 2020, shortly after 7:00 a.m., respondent was standing 

outside the HMS office when fellow HMS teacher, TT arrived. They exchanged morning 

greetings, then respondent used his thumb and forefinger to make an “L” shape and 

4 

lifted it to his forehead, asking TT what the hand gesture meant. TT did not know, and 

respondent insisted TT knew what the gesture meant because TT made the gesture 

“the other day” referring to respondent. TT denied making the gesture and a heated 

argument began. As respondent persisted, TT asked respondent “What is wrong with 

you?” TT felt threatened by respondent’s demeanor and claims during the argument. 

Following the confrontation, TT questioned respondent’s stability and believed 

respondent posed a safety threat to others on campus. 

Encounters with Special Education Instructional Aide MT 

12.  MT, assigned to respondent’s classes beginning at the 2020-21 school 

year, had several negative interactions with respondent and observed respondent’s 

questionable behavior. In late October or early November 2020, respondent 

confronted MT outside of the classroom claiming she was starting rumors about him 

and was trying to get respondent into trouble. After MT denied respondent’s claims, 

respondent stated to MT in Spanish, “you are with me or against me.” MT abruptly 

ended the conversation and respondent momentarily blocked MT from entering the 

classroom by holding the door shut. Respondent coldly stared at MT for the rest of the 

day without speaking to her. 

13.  During another incident, respondent accused MT of taking an item out of 

his backpack and replacing it with another item. Shocked, MT denied the accusation. 

Respondent then stated that a student could have taken the item. He proceeded to 

stare at MT for the rest of the day without speaking to her. At the end of the day as 

MT was leaving, respondent told her it was just a misunderstanding. 

5 

14.  During another incident, MT observed respondent extremely upset, 

“ranting and raving,” and accusing the parents of a student of slandering his name 

after they returned a gift card respondent had given to the student as a reward. 

15.  During another incident on October 29, 2020, respondent became upset 

and angry with MT when he was trying to get a disruptive student to behave during an 

instructional Zoom session. MT told respondent that she did not think the student 

could hear him because she was hearing inaudible static. Respondent angrily told MT 

not to ever tell him that again because he could hear perfectly fine through his 

headphones. MT had no reason to lie to respondent. 

16.  MT frequently observed respondent engage in angry, unwarranted 

behavior with her and his students. He would frequently pace around and leave the 

classroom with his fists clenched when agitated. He loudly yelled at a student over a 

minor issue of attendance at a Zoom session. He “storm[ed] out of the room” and 

walked around campus at least once a day. He coldly stared at MT and other staff 

members, making them extremely uncomfortable. 

Encounter with District HR Director SY 

17.  On November 4, 2020, SY met with respondent to inform him he was 

being placed on administrative leave with pay pending an internal investigation. 

Respondent emailed SY the next day, accusing SY of making an inappropriate hand 

gesture by tickling respondent’s palm with his finger while shaking hands with 

respondent. SY denied making the hand gesture or engaging in any other type of 

inappropriate behavior with respondent during their meeting. 

6 

RESIGNATION IN LIEU OF TERMINATION 

18.  On March 12, 2021, respondent entered into a Settlement Agreement 

with the District, agreeing to immediately resign from his employment with the District 

in lieu of termination, effective June 30, 2021. Respondent denied the underlying 

circumstances of his proposed termination by the District as set forth in the Notice. 

TESTIMONY OF EO 

19. 

EO is currently a third-grade elementary school teacher at Huron 

Elementary School. She taught at HMS during the 2020-21, and 2021-22 school years. 

EO confirmed the allegations set forth in the Notice and Accusation regarding her 

interactions with respondent. She added that during the incident in respondent’s 

classroom when she asked respondent why he ignored her, respondent was “really 

angry, got frustrated, and [was] mad.” Respondent walked toward her and “got into 

[her] personal space.” She felt respondent was going to hit her. She left after 

respondent told her to leave. She described the incident as “not a good situation for 

myself.” 

20. 

After the incident, EO began teaching her classes from her mentor TT’s 

classroom because she did not want to be in her own classroom, located next door to 

respondent’s classroom. If she had to be in her classroom, she locked the door to 

avoid respondent. She conceded that she invited respondent out to eat but did not 

recall when she did so. 

TESTIMONY OF RR 

21. 

RR has been a History and English Language Development teacher at 

HMS for 13 years. RR also confirmed that the incidents described in the Notice and 

7 

Accusation took place. He stated there was a loud banging on his classroom door one 

afternoon. He left his Zoom class session and answered the door. Respondent asked 

him about a special education Individualized Education Program (IEP), then RR went 

back to teaching. On a second occasion respondent loudly banged on RR’s classroom 

door. RR left his Zoom class session and answered the door. Again, respondent 

inquired about a non-urgent matter, and RR went back to teaching. A third time, 

respondent loudly banged on the door and RR did not answer or go to the door. RR 

felt that respondent should have known he was in a Zoom classroom session. 

22.  During another encounter when respondent came by RR’s classroom, 

respondent told RR he thought he was being spied on, and that “someone repeated 

something they should not have known.” Respondent asked RR more than once if he 

let someone in his Zoom session who was not supposed to be there, because teachers 

were having issues with children who were not in their class obtaining Zoom links. RR 

denied letting unauthorized students into his Zoom class sessions. 

TESTIMONY OF TT 

23. 

TT taught at HMS for three years beginning in 2019, left the state, 

returned to California, and began teaching at HMS again during the 2022-23 school 

year. TT confirmed his encounters with respondent as set forth in the Notice and 

Accusation. 

24. 

Regarding the hand gesture to the forehead incident on the morning of 

November 2, 2020, TT was so concerned about respondent’s behavior that he wrote 

two emails on the same date to HMS Principal Jisella Soto. The first email informed 

Principal Soto that respondent placed a symbol of the forefinger and thumb in the 

shape of the letter “L” to his forehead and asked TT, “what does this mean?” TT replied 

8 

that he was not sure. Respondent insisted that TT knew what the gesture meant and 

accused TT of making the gesture to him “the other day.” After repeatedly telling 

respondent that he did not make the gesture, respondent stated to TT, “if you don’t 

know I’m not going to remind you when you did it.” TT stated to respondent, “what is 

wrong with you?” Respondent ended the conversation and TT asked again “what is 

wrong with you?” Respondent did not answer and moved his belongings away from 

TT. TT continued to watch respondent because he felt threatened by respondent’s 

questioning. 

25. 

TT sent a second email to Principal Soto later that evening. He expressed 

his concerns about the incident between him and respondent that morning and felt 

respondent was not mentally stable to work on campus. He believed respondent 

displayed “some of the characteristics of a person that is or has been bullied.” TT 

asserted that he did “nothing derogatory, negative or embarrassing” to respondent, 

and that respondent spoke to TT as if he had done something to belittle or humiliate 

him publicly. TT informed Principal Soto that HMS did not currently have any 

procedures in place to check for firearms or other types of weapons brought to 

campus. TT did not feel comfortable being on campus with respondent there. TT 

wrote, “I feel as if I’M GOING TO HAVE TO WATCH OVER MY SHOULDER EVERY 

MINUTE OF THE DAY.” (Capitalization in original.) 

TESTIMONY OF MT 

26.  MT has been a Special Education Intervention Assistant at HMS for the 

past six years. Prior to her employment at HMS, she worked as a special education aide 

for six years at Huron Elementary School. MT worked with respondent in the same 

classroom from late August through early November during the 2020-21 school year. 

MT confirmed her encounters with respondent as set forth in the Notice and 

9 

Accusation. She added that she submitted a complaint against respondent after the 

multiple encounters because she felt threatened by him. On one occasion, respondent 

asked her to step out of the classroom to the hallway and accused her of gossiping 

about him. Respondent “did not know [MT] personally to say that.” When she tried to 

re-enter the classroom, respondent placed his hand on the door so that she could not 

open it. 

27.  One afternoon, MT was seated at a table reading with a student in the 

classroom. Respondent walked over and told them they were doing it wrong, began 

yelling, and pointed his finger “really hard” at them. Respondent’s behavior caused the 

student to begin crying. 

28.  On another day, respondent gave out gift cards as incentive for the 

students to continue working. He became mad and yelled at the students, accusing 

them of misusing their gift cards. 

29. 

Regarding the backpack incident, MT was nowhere near respondent’s 

desk when he accused her of taking something out of his backpack. Respondent found 

out later that the alleged missing item was in his backpack the whole time. 

30. 

Regarding the Zoom audio issues with students, MT observed students 

unable to hear on their headphones. MT tried to tell respondent what was happening. 

Respondent became upset, clinched his fist, walked out the door, and “took off.” MT 

stated that respondent displayed anger in front of his students, which happened 

throughout the time MT was respondent’s aide. 

31.  Over a period of a month and a half, respondent sat at his desk staring at 

MT. She could tell respondent was angry. MT did not want to be alone with 

10 

respondent anymore. After MT voiced her concerns about respondent with Principal 

Soto, respondent gave MT an “angel trinket” as an apology. 

TESTIMONY OF SY 

32. 

SY is the Director of Human Resources (HR) for the District. He met 

respondent in the fall of 2020 when concerns were raised by respondent’s coworkers. 

After a brief meeting with respondent, SY placed him on paid administrative leave. SY 

is aware of respondent’s claim that SY gave him a “weird handshake.” SY asserted 

there was “nothing out of the ordinary about the handshake.” SY explained that after 

their meeting, he reached out and shook respondent’s hand as a matter of 

professionalism. The exchange was cordial and calm. SY was surprised that respondent 

accused him of doing “something out of the ordinary.” This raised concerns for SY 

regarding respondent’s behavior. 

Respondent’s Evidence 

RESPONDENT’S TESTIMONY 

33. 

Respondent currently works as a sixth grade Special Education Resource 

Specialist for the Mohave Unified School District at California City Middle School. He 

loves working with students with special needs and has a daughter with special needs, 

making him a “better special needs teacher than most.” 

34.  On November 5, 2020, respondent emailed Superintendent Villanueva to 

report the inappropriate hand gesture made by SY during a handshake the previous 

day. Respondent asserted in his email that the hand gesture was a “gay handshake” 

according to a Google search he conducted. His internet search also revealed that the 

hand gesture meant “your [sic] fired.” Respondent also reported that TT made an “L” 

11 

sign on his forehead, and TT told others that respondent is gay. Respondent claimed 

his email complaint reporting conduct by SY and TT was the reason he was terminated. 

Respondent also claimed that Superintendent Villanueva never investigated the 

handshake incident because he was not interviewed and did not hear anything back 

about his complaint. He stated, the “investigation that should have happened never 

happened.” 

35.  On March 8, 2021, after respondent received the District’s Notice of 

Dismissal, but before the effective date of his termination, respondent filed complaints 

against EO, TT, and MT, alleging instances of bullying and harassment against him. 

Respondent’s complaints largely consisted of alleged instances where EO, TT, or MT 

made statements to him or others about his sexuality and mocked him for shaking due 

to his epilepsy. 

36. 

Respondent was first diagnosed with epilepsy at age five. On November 

1, 2020, he suffered a large seizure but was not at school at the time. On November 6 

and December 2, 2020, his doctor wrote orders prohibiting him from driving due to his 

seizure. Respondent was taking the seizure medication divalproex sodium extended 

release 500 milligram tablets, two tablets per day. Potential unwanted side effects 

include trembling or shaking of the hands or feet, quick to react or overreact 

emotionally, rapidly changing moods, false beliefs that cannot be changed by facts, 

delusions of persecution, mistrust, suspiciousness, or combativeness. The evidence is 

unclear whether respondent was taking the medication prior to his seizure on 

November 1, 2020. Regardless, respondent did not assert at hearing that his 

medication could have been a mitigating factor as the cause for the encounters with 

EO, RR, TT, MT, or SY. 

12 

37. 

Regarding his encounters with EO, respondent recalled being seated 

during the entire interaction on October 21, 2020, and he did not recall shaking. He 

claimed EO was “not remembering everything correctly.” Moreover, EO invited him to 

go out for pizza on one occasion after the incident. He did not believe EO felt 

threatened by him. Regarding TT, respondent accused TT of spreading rumors about 

him. Regarding RR, respondent denied banging loudly on RR’s door. He regretted 

knocking on RR’s door and in hindsight, he should have emailed RR to “schedule 

something.” Respondent asserted that he has “knocked on a lot of teachers’ doors in 

the past and did not have a problem.” In the future, he intends to “email every general 

education teacher” to discuss students they share. Respondent did not remember 

using the word “spying” when asking RR whether he allowed unauthorized individuals 

into Zoom meetings. Respondent denied that his question was a “paranoid thought,” 

rather it was about addressing an issue where students from other schools, usually 

siblings, were getting into Zoom and observing classes. Regarding MT, respondent 

denied ever yelling at any coworker. MT’s allegations “never happened,” and MT was 

telling others “false things about me.” 

CHARACTER REFERENCE LETTERS 

38. 

Respondent submitted nine reference letters as evidence of his good 

character and teaching competency. Six letters pre-date the events that took place as 

alleged in the Accusation, were written for the purpose of providing a teaching job 

reference and are given little evidentiary value. The remaining two letters were written 

by My Luu on May 16, 2023, and Jill Kennett on March 21, 2022. 

39.  My Luu worked with respondent in the Student Transition Educational 

Program, or STEP, for Compton Unified School District. She described respondent as 

highly motivated, encouraging to students, and dedicated to his tasks. Ms. Luu is 

13 

aware of the “allegation” but wrote that the “allegation” was “not credible to [her] in 

any way,” as respondent has “always conducted himself as a gentleman of one of the 

highest qualities.” Ms. Luu did not further explain what she meant by “allegation” or 

whether she knew of the nature of the multiple complaints against respondent at 

HMS, the District’s proposed termination, or his subsequent resignation. 

40. 

Jill Kennett is an elementary general education teacher at Horace Mann 

Elementary School in the Glendale Unified School District. Respondent provides special 

education core services for three students in Ms. Kennett’s first grade class. She 

described respondent as “respectful, courteous, and professional.” She has only known 

respondent a short time but is grateful for his assistance during the 2021-22 school 

year. Ms. Kennett did not express knowledge of the circumstances which led to the 

District’s proposed termination of respondent and his subsequent resignation from the 

District. 

41.  None of the authors provided insight into respondent’s conduct at HMS. 

Further, they did not express any knowledge of the allegations involving respondent’s 

aggressive or provoking conduct with EO, RR, TT, or MT, or the alleged handshake 

incident with SY. For these reasons, the letters are given minimal weight. 

Analysis 

42. 

As a teacher, respondent is held to a high standard of conduct and is a 

role model for children. A teacher is regarded as a role model for students, as noted by 

several courts: 

The calling (of a teacher) is so intimate, its duties so 

delicate, the things in which a teacher might prove 

unworthy or would fail are so numerous that they are 

14 

incapable of enumeration in any legislative enactment . . . 

His habits, his speech, his good name, his cleanliness, the 

wisdom and propriety of his unofficial utterances, his 

associations, all are involved. His ability to inspire children 

and to govern them, his power as a teacher, and the 

character for which he stands are matters of major concern 

in a teacher’s selection and retention. (Board of Education 

of San Francisco Unified School District v. Weiland (1960) 

179 Cal.App.2d 808, 4 Cal.Rptr. 286, citing from Goldsmith 

v. Board of Education, 66 Cal.App. 157, 168, 225 P. 783.) 

There are certain professions which impose upon persons 

attracted to them responsibilities and limitations on 

freedom of action which do not exist in regard to other 

callings. Public officials such as judges, policemen and 

schoolteachers fall into such a category. 

As between a teacher and his student, “(a)n important part 

of the education . . . is the instilling of a proper respect for 

authority and obedience to necessary discipline. Lessons are 

learned from example as well as from precept.” (Johnson v. 

Taft School Dist., 19 Cal.App.2d 405, 408, 65 P.2d 912.) And 

as our Supreme Court said in Board of Education v. Swan, 

41 Cal.2d 546, at 552, 261 P.2d 261, at 265, “A teacher . . . in 

the public school system is regarded by the public and 

pupils in the light of an exemplar, whose words and actions 

15 

are likely to be followed by the (students) coming under 

(his) care and protection.” 

(Board of Trustees v. Stubblefield (1971) 16 Cal.App.3d 820, 824-825; see also San 

Diego Unified School Dist. v. Commission on Professional Competence (2011) 194 

Cal.App.4th 1454, 1463-1464.) 

43. 

Respondent repeatedly violated the high standard of conduct required of 

him as a teacher. He ultimately resigned pending termination for his behavior towards 

his coworkers and HR Director SY. 

44. 

The evidence established that during the 2020-21 school year at HMS, 

respondent repeatedly engaged in acts of unprofessional conduct, fostered a negative 

working relationship, and caused some staff members to fear for their personal safety. 

EO credibly testified that respondent became angry and frustrated, walked toward her, 

and acted as though he was going to hit her. After that incident, EO was too afraid to 

work in her own classroom, which was located next door to respondent’s classroom. 

RR credibly testified that respondent banged on his classroom door on three separate 

occasions while RR was conducting class on Zoom. Respondent had no urgent need to 

speak to RR and conceded that he could have addressed RR by emailing him. The 

evidence also established that respondent accused RR of letting unauthorized 

individuals into his Zoom class for the purpose of spying on respondent. RR credibly 

denied doing so. 

45. 

The evidence also established that respondent made a hand gesture with 

his forefinger and thumb in the shape of the letter “L” and placed it on his forehead, 

accusing TT of previously making the same gesture to him “the other day.” TT credibly 

denied doing so and felt threatened by respondent’s accusations. TT was so concerned 

16 

that he sent two emails the following day to Principal Soto, stating his concerns about 

respondent’s mental stability and TT’s personal safety. TT felt he would have to watch 

over his shoulder “every minute of the day” that respondent was on campus. 

46. 

The evidence also established through MT’s credible testimony that 

respondent: (1) accused MT of gossiping about him and prevented MT from re-

entering the classroom by blocking her from opening the door; (2) yelled in the 

classroom at MT and a student when they were reading, making the student cry; (3) 

became mad and yelled at students, accusing them of misusing gift cards given to 

them by respondent; (4) wrongly accusing MT of taking something out of his 

backpack; (5) became upset, clenched his fist, walked out of the door and left the 

classroom when MT commented on students being unable to hear on their 

headphones on Zoom; and (6) sat at his desk staring at MT while angry. Respondent 

gave MT an “angel trinket” as an apology. 

47. 

Lastly, the evidence established through SY’s credible testimony that 

nothing out of the ordinary took place when he and respondent shook hands on 

November 4, 2020. 

48.  No friends, family, colleagues, supervisors, or anyone else in the teaching 

profession testified on behalf of respondent to attest to his teaching skills, calm 

demeanor, or friendliness towards students or staff. His character reference letters 

were given little weight. The letters provided no insight from others of any reasonable 

explanation for respondent’s behavior towards the teachers and staff at issue. 

49. 

Respondent admitted that he suffers from epilepsy and takes medication. 

However, he did not present evidence that he was taking his medication during the 

time the incidents occurred or claim that the side effects of his medication, which 

17 

include mood changes, shaking, or false delusions, could be a plausible explanation for 

his unprofessional and threatening behavior. Therefore, the side effects of his 

medication were not established as a mitigating factor. 

50. 

Respondent testified in a forthright manner, but blamed others for 

bullying him at school. However, being bullied does not justify his unprofessional 

conduct. Respondent presented his complaints about bullying to District 

administrators after he was served with the Notice of Dismissal, but prior to the 

effective date. He did not present any corroborating evidence to support his testimony 

or late-filed complaints about being bullied. Respondent took no responsibility for his 

conduct. His failure to do so reflects a lack of rehabilitation. (Seide v. Committee of Bar 

Examiners (1989) 49 Cal.3d 933, 940 [“[f]ully acknowledging the wrongfulness of 

[one’s] actions is an essential step towards rehabilitation.”].) 

Morrison Factors 

51. 

In Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 235 

(Morrison), the California Supreme Court held that “an individual can be removed from 

the teaching profession only upon a showing that his retention in the profession poses 

a significant danger of harm to either students, school employees, or others who 

might be affected by his actions as a teacher.” The court concluded that a teacher’s 

conduct cannot abstractly be characterized as “immoral,” “unprofessional,” or 

“involving moral turpitude” unless the conduct indicated that a teacher is unfit 

to teach. (Id. at p. 229.) (Bold added.) The court set forth the following guidelines, 

which have since been enumerated in California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 

80302, subdivision (a): 

18 

The Committee, in conducting its investigation, shall 

determine the relationship between the alleged misconduct 

and the applicant’s or holder’s fitness, competence, or 

ability to effectively perform the duties authorized by the 

credential. Such relationship may be based on facts which 

include, but are not limited to, the following: 

(1) The likelihood that the conduct may have adversely 

affected students, fellow teachers, or the educational 

community, and the degree of such adversity 

anticipated; 

(2) The proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct; 

(3) The type of credential held or applied for by the person 

involved; 

(4) The extenuating or aggravating circumstances 

surrounding the conduct; 

(5) The praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives 

resulting in the conduct; 

(6) The likelihood of the recurrence of the questioned 

conduct; 

(7) The extent to which disciplinary action may inflict an 

adverse impact or chilling effect upon the constitutional 

rights of the person involved, or other certified persons; 

19 

(8) The publicity or notoriety given to the conduct. 

In evaluating the Morrison factors, only the pertinent factors need to be 

analyzed. (Broney v. California Com. on Teacher Credentialing (2010) 108 Cal.App.4th 

462, 476.) In addition, the reviewing body is not bound by “rigid procedure.” Rather, it 

may apply the Morrison factors in the aggregate, and consider the totality of a 

teacher’s offensive conduct. (Woodland Joint Unified School Dist. v. Commission on 

Professional Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1457 [Commission does not have 

to show that “every charge in the series would independently justify” adverse action].) 

ADVERSE EFFECT ON OTHERS 

52. 

Respondent’s improper and unprofessional conduct had an adverse 

effect on the teachers and students involved. Four teachers testified about the adverse 

impacts of respondent’s behavior and how his continued teaching would impact them. 

EO, TT, RR, and MT did not feel comfortable or safe being in the same room as 

respondent. Respondent’s erratic behavior was unpredictable to them. MT testified 

about several incidents where respondent’s conduct had adverse effects on students. 

PROXIMITY OR REMOTENESS IN TIME 

53. 

Respondent resigned from his employment with the District on June 30, 

2021, for misconduct which occurred in during the 2020/21 school year. The District 

reported his change in employment status thereafter. These incidents are not remote 

in time. Complainant did not delay filing the Accusation against respondent. 

20 

TYPE OF CREDENTIAL HELD 

54. 

Respondent’s preliminary and clear credentials allow him to teach special 

education students. Such students are a particularly vulnerable student population 

where a nurturing environment, safety, and protection are paramount. 

EXTENUATING OR AGGRAVATING CIRCUMSTANCES 

55. 

California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80300, subdivision (b), 

states, in relevant part: 

An “aggravating factor” is an event or circumstance which 

demonstrates that a greater degree of adverse action for an 

act of professional misconduct is needed to adequately 

protect the public, schoolchildren or the profession. 

Aggravating factors may include, but are not limited to, the 

following: 

[¶] … [¶] 

(2) that the misconduct evidences multiple acts of 

wrongdoing or demonstrate a pattern of misconduct; 

[¶] … [¶] 

(4) that the misconduct significantly harmed a child 

entrusted to the care of a credential holder or applicant, 

significantly harmed the public or the educational system; 

21 

(5) that the holder or applicant demonstrated indifference 

toward the consequence of the misconduct, which includes 

failure to comply with known court orders. 

[¶] … [¶] 

56. 

Respondent failed in large part to accept responsibility or recognize the 

seriousness of his conduct. Teachers are role models for professionalism and 

compassion towards students and other teachers. Given the seriousness of 

respondent’s misconduct and his failure to accept any responsibility, there is a 

likelihood that respondent would repeat the same or similar misconduct. For these 

reasons, a high degree of discipline is necessary to protect the public, schoolchildren, 

and the profession. 

57. 

There were no mitigating circumstances to justify respondent’s 

unprofessional conduct. While many individuals wrote on his behalf, the letters 

predated the events at HMS, and none of the individuals provided any insight into 

respondent’s negative behavior. 

PRAISEWORTHINESS OR BLAMEWORTHINESS OF MOTIVES 

58. 

There is nothing praiseworthy about respondent’s unprofessional 

conduct towards EO, RR, TT, MT, and SY. “The lack of praiseworthiness in [plaintiff’s] 

conduct speaks for itself.” (Broney v. California Com. on Teacher Credentialing, supra, 

108 Cal.App.4th 462, 477.) In addition, there is no praiseworthiness in his motives. 

LIKELIHOOD OF RECURRENCE 

59. 

Given the seriousness of respondent’s misconduct and his continued 

failure to accept or recognize any responsibility, there is a substantial likelihood that 

22 

respondent will again engage in the same or similar conduct. This likelihood is made 

more concerning by the fact that respondent attributes his conduct to those who 

allegedly bullied and gossiped about him. 

EXTENT TO WHICH DISCIPLINARY ACTION MAY INFLICT ADVERSE IMPACT OR 

CHILLING EFFECT 

60. 

Respondent’s constitutional rights of free expression are not at issue 

here. However, the state’s interest in protecting children is sufficiently compelling to 

allow discipline in this instance and under these circumstances. 

PUBLICITY OR NOTORIETY GIVEN TO THE CONDUCT 

61. 

There was no evidence presented to establish that there was notoriety 

among students regarding respondent’s conduct with them. 

CONCLUSION 

62.  When all the Morrison factors are weighed and balanced, the conduct in 

which respondent engaged shows that he is unfit to teach. His retention in the 

teaching profession would pose a significant danger of harm to students, the 

educational community, and the public. Specifically, the evidence established that 

respondent engaged in repeated acts of misconduct towards teachers who felt 

threatened by respondent, and falsely accused the District’s HR Director of an 

inappropriate handshake. 

63. 

Respondent’s explanation of events was not credible, and five separate 

individuals testified regarding respondent’s confrontational, aggressive, and negative 

behavior. Respondent’s allegations of bullying by his coworkers were unsupported by 

the evidence. The Commission does not have adequate assurances that respondent 

23 

will not engage in the same misconduct again. As set forth in the Factual Findings and 

Legal Conclusions as a whole, the evidence established that respondent demonstrated 

unprofessional conduct and evident unfitness for service. Given the serious nature of 

respondent’s misconduct and the potential for harm, application of the Morrison 

factors, and aggravating factors, the appropriate adverse action is revocation. 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

Burden and Standard of Proof 

1. 

Complainant bears the burden of proof in this matter. The standard of 

proof is clear and convincing evidence. (See Gardner v. Commission of Professional 

Competence (1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035, 1039; Ettinger v. Board of Medical Quality 

Assurance (1982) 135 Cal.App.3d 583.) “Clear and convincing evidence” means 

evidence of such convincing force that it demonstrates, in contrast to the opposing 

evidence, a high probability of the truth of the facts for which it is offered. It is a 

higher standard of proof than proof by a preponderance of the evidence. (See, BAJI 

No. 2.62.) “Evidence of a charge is clear and convincing so long as there is a ‘high 

probability’ that the charge is true.” (Broadman v. Commission on Judicial Performance 

(1998) 18 Cal.4th 1079, 1090.) 

2. 

Pursuant to Education Code section 44421, the Commission shall: 

[P]ublicly reprove, revoke or suspend for immoral or 

unprofessional conduct, or for persistent defiance of, and 

refusal to obey, the laws regulating the duties of persons 

serving the public school system, or for any cause that 

would have warranted the denial of an application for a 

24 

credential or the renewal thereof, or for evident unfitness 

for service. 

3. 

An “adverse action” is the “denial of an application for a credential, a 

private admonition, or public reproval of a credential holder, or the suspension or 

revocation of a credential.” (Ed. Code, § 44000.5.) 

4. 

California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80300, subdivision (b), 

provides that aggravating factors necessitate a greater degree of adverse action to 

adequately protect the public, schoolchildren, or the profession. Aggravating factors 

include: multiple acts of wrongdoing or pattern of misconduct; significant harm to a 

child entrusted to the teacher, or to the public or educational system; and indifference 

toward the consequences of the misconduct. 

Cause for Adverse Action 

UNPROFESSIONAL CONDUCT 

5. 

Unprofessional conduct “is, as it were, often a lesser included form of 

proscribed behavior within ‘evident unfitness for service’ … ‘Evident unfitness for 

service’ requires that unfitness for service be attributable to a defect in temperament-a 

requirement not necessary for a finding of ‘unprofessional conduct.’” (Woodland Joint 

Unified School Dist. v. Commission on Professional Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 

1429, 1445.) Based on the Factual Findings as a whole, respondent’s repeated 

unprofessional conduct, fostering a negative working relationship and causing District 

staff to fear for their personal safety constitutes unprofessional conduct. Cause exists 

for adverse action against respondent’s credentials based on unprofessional conduct 

pursuant to Education Code section 44421. 

25 

EVIDENT UNFITNESS FOR SERVICE 

6. 

“Evident unfitness for service” means a teacher is “clearly not fit, not 

adapted to or unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of temperamental defects 

or inadequacies.” (Woodland Joint Unified School District v. Commission on 

Professional Competence, 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444.) “Unlike ‘unprofessional conduct,’ 

‘evident unfitness for service’ connotes a fixed character trait, presumably not 

remediable merely on receipt of notice that one’s conduct fails to meet the 

expectations of the employing school district.” (Ibid.) The evidence established that 

respondent’s conduct, as alleged and proven at hearing, and his failure to 

acknowledge the wrongfulness of his conduct, demonstrates that he is unsuitable for 

teaching due to a fixed character trait, not remediable merely on notice that his 

conduct failed to meet the District’s expectations. Consequently, based on the Factual 

Findings as a whole, cause exists for adverse action against respondent’s credentials 

based on evident unfitness for service pursuant to Education Code section 44421. 

Conclusion 

7. 

Application of the Morrison factors to the facts in this matter, on balance, 

indicate that respondent is unfit to teach. Adverse action against respondent is 

warranted, and such action must be balanced in light of the mitigating and 

extenuating circumstances involved. The purpose of a disciplinary action such as this is 

not to punish the licensee, but rather to protect the public. (Camacho v. Youde (1979) 

95 Cal.App.3d 161; Small v. Smith (1971) 16 Cal.App.3d 450, 457.) Revocation of 

respondent’s credentials is necessary to protect the students of California schools. 

26 

ORDER 

The Preliminary Education Specialist Instruction Credential, Clear Education 

Specialist Instruction Credential, and any other credentials, certificates, and 

authorizations issued to respondent Edward Daniel Ronquillo are hereby REVOKED. 

DATE: July 26, 2023

DANETTE C. BROWN 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings 

27 

 
 
 
