BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
In the Matter of the Accusation and Statement of Issues 
Against: 
JOHNATHEN BLAKE TONOZZI, Respondent 
Agency Case No. 2-314344244 
OAH No. 2023080690 
PROPOSED DECISION 
Patrice De Guzman Huber, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ), Office of 
Administrative Hearings (OAH), State of California, heard this matter by 
videoconference on April 17 and 18, 2024 from Sacramento, California. 
Steve J. Pyun, Deputy Attorney General, represented complainant Mary Vixie 
Sandy, Ed.D., Executive Director of the California Commission on Teacher Credentialing 
(Commission), State of California. 
Joshua F. Richtel, Esq., represented respondent Johnathen Blake Tonozzi, who 
appeared.
The record was held open for complainant to redact her exhibits. Evidence was 
received, the record closed, and the matter submitted for decision on April 26, 2024. 2 FACTUAL FINDINGS
Jurisdictional Matters 
1. On April 19, 2016, the Commission issued respondent an Emergency 
30-Day Substitute Teaching Permit (permit), which expired on May 1, 2020.
2. On December 15, 2017, the Commission issued respondent a Certificate 
of Clearance (certificate). The certificate expired on January 1, 2023. The Commission 
may discipline an expired certificate. (Ed. Code, § 44440, subd. (b).) 
3. On February 3, 2021, the Commission reissued respondent’s permit, 
which expired on March 1, 2022. The Commission may discipline an expired permit. 
(Ed. Code, § 44440, subd. (b).) 
4. On June 28, 2021, the Commission issued respondent a Preliminary 
Five-Year Single Subject Teaching Credential (credential). The credential will expire on 
July 1, 2026, unless renewed or revoked. 
5. On February 9, 2022, respondent applied for reissuance of his permit 
(application). The application remains pending and the permit has not been reissued. 
6. On June 5, 2023, Commission staff, on behalf of complainant in her 
official capacity, signed and thereafter filed an Accusation and Statement of Issues. 
Complainant seeks to deny respondent's application based on his alleged misconduct 
involving moral turpitude, pursuant to Education Code section 44345, subdivision (e). 
Complainant also seeks to revoke all credentials, certificates, and authorizations issued 
to respondent, based on respondent's alleged unprofessional conduct, immoral 3 conduct, conduct involving moral turpitude, and evident unfitness for service, pursuant 
to Education Code sections 44345, subdivision (e), and 44421.
Generally, complainant alleged, between September 2021 and October 2021,
while a high school social studies and history teacher for Central Unified School 
District (CUSD) in Fresno County, California, respondent engaged in inappropriate and 
unprofessional conduct toward A.D., a student. In aggravation, complainant alleged 
respondent’s misconduct evidences multiple acts of wrongdoing and demonstrates a 
pattern of misconduct. Complainant further alleged respondent’s misconduct 
significantly harmed A.D., the public, or the educational system. 
7. Respondent timely filed a Notice of Defense and request for hearing. The 
matter was set for an evidentiary hearing before an ALJ of the OAH pursuant to 
Education Code section 44246 and Government Code section 11500 et seq.Respondent’s Interactions with A.D. 
8. In August 2021, CUSD hired respondent to teach at Justin Garza High 
School (JGHS). Fifteen-year-old student A.D. was in respondent's social studies class. 
She occasionally spent the lunch hour in respondent's classroom, along with other 
students. In September 2021, respondent and A.D. began “following” each other on 
Instagram, a social media application with a chat function. From September 23, 2021, 
until October 23, 2021, they regularly chatted on Instagram. 
9. On Instagram, respondent and A.D. talked about various subjects, 
including school, pop culture, music, and fashion. They used memes, emojis, slang, and 
profanity. Respondent mentioned an ex-girlfriend a few times and joked about 
wanting to date another teacher. In some conversations, A.D. talked about a crush she 
had on a college student who was text messaging her. Respondent offered to give A.D. 4 a pair of basketball shorts. A.D. offered to purchase respondent a Starbucks drink, 
jokingly asked to drive his car, and asked him to buy her a pair of shoes. Respondent 
declined each time. 
10. In early October 2021, JGHS Vice Principal Brent Dettman learned 
respondent and A.D. were chatting on Instagram. Mr. Dettman suggested to 
respondent he cease social media contact with A.D. or any other student. Respondent 
immediately “unfollowed” A.D. on Instagram. Later that same month, CUSD 
administration saw some of the Instagram messages and became concerned. Jack 
Kelejian, CUSD Assistant Superintendent, assigned Eliseo Cuellar, CUSD Director of 
Human Resources, to investigate respondent’s interactions with A.D. On November 8, 
2021, CUSD placed respondent on paid administrative leave, pending the outcome of 
its investigation. 
11. To investigate, Mr. Cuellar interviewed witnesses and prepared written 
summaries of the interviews. Mr. Cuellar wrote a “BRICK” report memorializing his 
investigation and testified consistently with that report. “BRICK” stands for 
Background; Rule; Impact; Corrective Action; and Know Your Rights. 
12. Mr. Cuellar interviewed A.D., who testified at hearing consistently with 
Mr. Cuellar's written summary of her interview. Initially, A.D. and respondent 
connected over their shared experience of having parents with cancer, specifically 
A.D.’s mother and respondent’s father. A.D. felt at ease talking to respondent on 
Instagram because Ashley Schoolfield, A.D.’s “Leadership” teacher, regularly checked 
the social media of “Leadership” students, including A.D. On three occasions, A.D. 
accepted boba from respondent. She believes she gave respondent money to 
purchase boba at least once. A.D. was on the basketball team and accepted a pair of 
basketball shorts from respondent because she could use another pair of shorts. 5 It was uncommon for A.D. and respondent to be alone together. On the rare 
occasion they were alone in respondent’s classroom, the door was always propped 
open with a chair. A.D. testified respondent never touched her inappropriately. Their 
physical contact was minimal, usually just to pose together for photos. A.D. recalled on 
one occasion, she “hit” respondent’s arm jokingly. A.D. began feeling “weird” about 
chatting on Instagram with respondent when she heard rumors at school, suggesting
she and respondent had an inappropriate relationship. To avoid the rumors, A.D.
"unfollowed" respondent on Instagram. 
13. Mr. Cuellar interviewed J.B., a student in respondent’s history class, along 
with J.B.’s mother, J  M . Ms. M  initially contacted JGHS administrators 
because J.B. received an F in respondent’s class. Ms. M also wanted to report what 
J.B. told her about A.D. and respondent. 
14. J.B. testified at hearing. She and A.D. used to be but are no longer 
friends. At hearing and in her interview, J.B. said A.D. showed her some of the 
Instagram messages between A.D. and respondent. In J.B.’s opinion, A.D. and 
respondent talked to each other as if they were friends. At hearing and in her 
interview, J.B. stated she observed, while respondent was loading boxes into his 
vehicle in the parking lot after school, A.D. was sitting in the driver's seat of his vehicle. 
At hearing, J.B. testified, while J.B. and A.D. waited for rides after school, A.D. combed 
her fingers through respondent's hair. In her interview, J.B. said nothing about this 
incident to Mr. Cuellar. 
During the interview, Mr. Cuellar asked J.B. how respondent conducted himself 
around A.D. J.B. said respondent often made jokes. J.B. told Mr. Cuellar, on one 
occasion, she saw respondent "grab" A.D.'s head and say, "This is what macaroni looks 
like.” At hearing, J.B. gave a different version of this incident. She testified respondent 
6 high-fived A.D. and said, "This is what macaroni sounds like." J.B. testified she believed 
the "macaroni" comment was a joke, but she did not understand what it meant. 
15. As part of his investigation, Mr. Cuellar reviewed the Instagram messages. 
He noted respondent used profanity and talked about other students and teachers. 
Mr. Cuellar found particularly alarming a photo respondent sent to A.D. The photo 
depicted a velociraptor from the film . The photo did not bear any text 
captions. After sending the photo, respondent messaged, “Haha. Clever girl. Jurassic 
Park.” Mr. Cuellar interpreted respondent’s use of the photo as his admission he is a 
predator. During Mr. Cuellar’s investigation, he did not ask respondent or A.D. to 
explain or provide context to any of the Instagram messages.
16. Respondent resigned on November 19, 2021. At hearing, Mr. Kelejian 
confirmed he accepted respondent’s resignation. After CUSD’s Board of Trustees 
approved respondent’s resignation, Mr. Kelejian notified the Commission of 
respondent’s change in employment status, pursuant to California Code of 
Regulations, title 5, section 80303. PSYCHOLOGIST OPINION ON INSTAGRAM MESSAGES
17. Paul S.D. Berg, Ph.D., testified. He has been a licensed clinical 
psychologist in California since 1967. Dr. Berg earned his bachelor’s degree at the City 
College of New York in New York City and his master’s degree and Ph.D. at Michigan 
State University in East Lansing, Michigan. He has been operating a private practice 
since 1964, specializing in post-traumatic disorders, family dysfunctions, and 
depressive and anxiety disorders. Dr. Berg also conducts forensic evaluations and has 
been qualified as an expert witness in superior courts. He has evaluated and treated 
victims of grooming and, occasionally, groomers. 7 18. Dr. Berg explained a grooming relationship requires a power imbalance 
in addition to “regular courting” behaviors such as emotional bonding, trust building, 
and gifting. A groomer is good at identifying potential victims who are missing 
something from their lives, which the groomer seeks to fill. Dr. Berg explained a 
groomer uses courting behaviors to gradually disarm a potential victim, until the 
groomer achieves the ultimate goal, a sexual relationship.
19. In reviewing the Instagram messages between respondent and A.D., 
Dr. Berg noted what appeared to be respondent’s attempt to disarm A.D. by
minimizing the power imbalance. For example, respondent used language culturally 
accessible to someone younger, such as “dude,” “bruh” [bro], and profanity. According 
to Dr. Berg, the gifts, such as boba and shorts, and conversations about their common 
experience of having a cancer-stricken parent were also generally consistent with an 
attempt to disarm. 
20. Although Dr. Berg opined some of respondent’s behaviors appeared 
consistent with grooming, he did not treat, forensically evaluate, or diagnose 
respondent. According to Dr. Berg, the Instagram messages alone are insufficient to 
clinically conclude whether respondent is a groomer. Respondent’s Evidence 
21. Before JGHS, respondent had never taught or interacted with students in 
person. The teaching credential program at National University in Fresno, California, 
required respondent to work as a student teacher for six months. He completed this 
requirement at Ahwahnee Middle School in Fresno, California, where he interacted 
with students in virtual classrooms and by email. Classes were virtual because of 
COVID-19. Respondent obtained his teaching credential at 30 years old. 8 22. When CUSD began investigating respondent, he immediately asked his 
long-time therapist, Patricia Behrens, to help him identify his problematic conduct. 
Respondent has been seeing Ms. Behrens at least once per week since 2019. With her
guidance, respondent realized he had acted inappropriately toward A.D. and felt he 
failed as a teacher. He resigned from JGHS to spend time on himself and his issues. 
23. In therapy, respondent learned how his experiences culminated in his 
problematic behavior. Growing up, he lacked independence. He continues to live at 
home, even as an adult. His parents, particularly his mother, did everything for him, 
including cooking and other household chores. When respondent was with his ex-
girlfriend for eight years, her family "never took no for an answer" and regularly 
disrespected his boundaries. Respondent realized his anxiety, insecurity, and desire to 
be liked conditioned him to disregard boundaries so long as the end result is people’s 
approval. 
24. Specifically as to A.D., respondent realized he felt comfortable with her 
because they each had a parent who had cancer. Additionally, they also liked similar 
music and fashion. As a result, respondent felt they were "closer to equals,” and he 
could treat her as a friend. As friends, respondent felt it was acceptable to talk to her 
casually, using profanity, emojis, and memes. At hearing, respondent explained the  photo Mr. Cuellar found alarming. The photo is a meme referencing a 
scene in the movie wherein a character refers to a velociraptor as a “clever girl.” 
Respondent used the meme in response to A.D.’s immediately preceding message to 
him saying, “You’re so clever.” He did not use the meme to confess any predatory 
intent. 
25. Respondent admitted giving A.D. boba on a number of occasions, 
despite feeling, as he described, like a “delivery man.” Respondent also admitted 9 giving A.D. basketball shorts. He explained he had planned to donate the shorts to 
charity. They were counterfeit Off-White brand shorts respondent bought in Asia. 
Because A.D. seemed to also like the brand, respondent thought to give the shorts to 
her rather than donate them to charity. 
26. Although A.D.’s attention and friendship validated respondent’s desire to 
be liked, respondent denied any inappropriate physical contact with A.D. or any sexual 
interest in her. He testified he was rarely alone with her and denied she ever touched 
his hair or sat in his vehicle. Even so, respondent learned in therapy he demonstrated 
poor judgment when he treated A.D. as a peer. Now, respondent understands the 
importance of maintaining firm boundaries within each person’s respective role. 
Respondent regularly engages in a self-check and looks critically at his thought 
process and behaviors. Every week, he seeks Ms. Behrens’s guidance to ensure he is 
behaving appropriately. 
27. Due to respondent’s better understanding of himself, his triggers, and his 
behaviors, he would not cross professional boundaries again in the future. After 
spending almost two years focusing on self-reflection and self-improvement, he 
returned to teaching in September 2023. He secured employment as a substitute 
teacher at the Center for Advanced Research and Technology (CART), a high school in 
Fresno, California. At CART, respondent does not treat students as equals and keeps a 
professional distance from them. Respondent was pleased when his efforts to act 
appropriately as an educator and perform well at CART resulted in CART’s offer to 
work as a long-term substitute teacher for six months. Respondent enjoys teaching at 
CART and would like to continue teaching there. 
28. Ms. Behrens testified at hearing. She has been a Licensed Marriage and 
Family Therapist (LMFT) since 2011. Prior to her career as an LMFT, Ms. Behrens was a 10 probation officer in Fresno and Madera Counties and, later, a credentialed teacher of 
third and fourth grades. Ms. Behrens described respondent as codependent, 
particularly on his mother. Respondent and his mother are so close that, in childhood 
and throughout adulthood, respondent would report his whereabouts and all details 
of his daily life. As a result of this codependent relationship, respondent lacked 
individuation or a sense of a separate self. Without individuation, boundaries appeared 
blurry to respondent. Because respondent is anxious and insecure, blurry boundaries 
were acceptable so long as the end result was others' approval. According to 
Ms. Behrens, he lacked "social maturity" to think critically about social interactions. 
29. When respondent’s boundary issues came to light, Ms. Behrens and 
respondent focused their therapy sessions on helping respondent learn how to set and 
maintain boundaries. Together, they completed a therapeutic workbook on 
boundaries. Ms. Behrens is actively involved in helping respondent continually 
evaluate his conduct and judgment. In their weekly sessions, respondent describes his 
thought process and social interactions to Ms. Behrens to gain further insight on what 
is going well and what could improve. Over the years, Ms. Behrens testified 
respondent has shown “tremendous” growth. 
30. Ms. Behrens believes respondent did not have any sexual interest in A.D. 
Ms. Behrens conceded some of respondent’s conduct may appear consistent with 
grooming behaviors. However, in her opinion, any apparent consistency is inadvertent 
and not motivated by the ultimate goal of a sexual relationship. Analysis 
31. Evidence Code section 780 sets forth factors to consider in determining 
the credibility of a witness. The trier of fact may “accept part of the testimony of a 12 33. Respondent's testimony on the meme was also persuasive. 
A meme is an amusing, interesting, or humorous item, such as a captioned image or 
video, spread rapidly on social media. The  meme respondent used 
references a scene in which a character tries to hunt a pack of velociraptors. As the 
character prepares to shoot one, another velociraptor successfully ambushes him. 
Upon seeing this velociraptor, he states, "Clever girl," as if to say the pack outsmarted 
him. Respondent testified he used the meme to respond to A.D. calling him clever, not 
to confess any predatory motive. 
Mr. Cuellar's interpretation that respondent used the meme to admit he was a 
predator is not persuasive, as it is inconsistent with the meme’s actual reference. More 
broadly, Mr. Cuellar’s opinions on the Instagram messages or social media are given 
little weight in light of his misunderstanding of pop culture references and modern 
ways younger people communicate and his failure to, at the very least, ask either 
respondent or A.D. to provide context or explain the slang and memes they used. 
34. Similarly, J.B.'s testimony is unpersuasive in light of her bias, motive, and 
inconsistent statements. (Evid. Code, § 780, subds. (f), (h).) J.B.'s failing grade in 
respondent's class and her falling out of friendship with A.D. reveal a bias and motive 
to make allegations damaging to respondent, A.D., or both. (at subd. (f).) J.B.'s 
inconsistency also suggests she is not credible. The difference between "grabbing" 
A.D.'s head and giving her a high-five, and the difference between the appearance and 
sound of macaroni, are significant and cannot reasonably be attributed to an 
understandable variance in her recall. J.B. did not explain why her story changed 
between her interview and hearing. ( at subd. (h).) 
Additionally, A.D. combing her fingers through respondent's hair, if true, would 
be a vivid image. There is no reason J.B. would omit telling Mr. Cuellar about this 13 incident when her interview was closer in time to the event. Instead, J.B. described the 
hair touching incident for the first time at hearing, nearly three years later. (Evid. Code, 
§ 780, subds. (c), (d).) For the above reasons, J.B.’s testimony was not credible or 
persuasive. 
35. In contrast, A.D.'s testimony is given great weight. Her testimony was 
consistent with her statements during the CUSD investigation, with respondent's 
statements and testimony, and with portions of J.B.'s statements and testimony. (Evid. 
Code, § 780, subds. (a), (g), (j).) A.D. was forthcoming about respondent's interactions 
with her, including chatting on Instagram and his gifts of boba and basketball shorts. 
A.D.’s testimony was consistent with respondent’s independent testimony they were 
rarely alone and he never touched her inappropriately. ( at subds. (c), (d), (g), (i).) 
A.D.’s perception of respondent's interactions with her as friendly is also consistent 
with the tenor of their Instagram messages as a whole. ( ) 
36. Dr. Berg's testimony was also credible, considering his objectivity and 
expertise in the field of psychology. (Evid. Code, § 780, subds. (d), (f), (j).) Based on 
Dr. Berg’s assessment, respondent exhibited behaviors consistent with grooming. 
However, as Dr. Berg noted, the Instagram messages alone are insufficient to clinically 
conclude whether respondent is a groomer.
37. Ms. Behrens's testimony is given great weight in light of her credentials 
and longstanding and ongoing treatment of respondent. (Evid. Code, § 780, subds. (c), 
(d).) While some of respondent's behaviors may appear consistent with grooming 
behaviors, Ms. Behrens opined any apparent consistency is inadvertent. Further, 
Ms. Behrens testified credibly about respondent's issues, his rehabilitation efforts, and 
his “tremendous” growth within the last few years. (at subds. (c), (d).) 14 38. The criteria to be reviewed in determining whether a teacher is unfit to 
teach are set forth in  (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214 and 
have been codified in California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80302, subdivision 
(a). These factors are: 
(1) the likelihood that the conduct may have adversely 
affected students or fellow teachers, and the degree of such 
adversity anticipated; 
(2) the proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct; 
(3) the types of credentials held or sought by the person 
involved; 
(4) any extenuating or aggravating circumstances 
surrounding the conduct; 
(5) the praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives 
resulting in the conduct; 
(6) the likelihood of recurrence of the questioned conduct; 
(7) the extent to which disciplinary action may have an 
adverse impact or chilling effect upon the constitutional 
rights of the person involved, or other teachers; and 
(8) the publicity or notoriety given to the conduct. 15 LIKELIHOOD OF ADVERSE EFFECTS ON STUDENTS OR FELLOW TEACHERS
39. A.D., other students, and respondent’s fellow teachers likely experienced 
adverse effects due to respondent’s conduct. A teacher's duty goes beyond 
substantive instruction. The educational system is meant to serve as training for the 
larger society. School is where young people learn their respective roles, how to 
respect other people's roles and boundaries, and how to navigate diverse social 
relationships. As an educator, respondent had a responsibility to model appropriate 
behavior and conduct. He failed to do so when he crossed boundaries and behaved 
inappropriately toward A.D. Respondent’s conduct overall weakened the integrity of 
the educational system’s role in preparing students to integrate into society. PROXIMITY OR REMOTENESS IN TIME
40. Respondent’s conduct occurred in 2021. It is more proximate than 
remote in time.
TYPES OF CREDENTIALS HELD AND SOUGHT
41. Respondent holds a Preliminary Five-Year Single Subject Teaching 
Credential and seeks to renew his Emergency 30-Day Substitute Teaching Permit. Both 
the credential and the permit require teaching competence. Furthermore, a single 
subject teaching credential is most likely used in upper grades, where respondent will 
interact with teenaged students like A.D. Therefore, his ability to manage those 
relationships appropriately is more important in light of his credential. 
EXTENUATING OR AGGRAVATING CIRCUMSTANCES
42. Neither the Education Code nor the applicable regulations specify what 
constitutes “extenuating circumstances.” However, California Code of Regulations, 16 title 5, section 80300, subdivision (m), defines “mitigating factor” as “an event or 
circumstance which demonstrates that the public, school children and the profession 
would be adequately protected by a more lenient degree of adverse action or no 
adverse action whatsoever.” Although respondent ultimately failed to maintain proper 
boundaries with A.D., the evidence suggests he made some attempt to maintain 
professional distance. He declined her offer to buy him a Starbucks drink, did not 
permit her to drive his vehicle, and declined to purchase shoes for her. On the rare 
occasion they were alone together, respondent ensured the door remained open. 
Respondent's efforts at self-improvement after he realized his wrongdoing are 
further mitigating. He was remorseful, felt like a failure, and decided to focus on 
correcting himself before returning to teaching. He demonstrated he gained insight 
into his triggers, motivations, and thought process, and his efforts to check himself 
and his conduct continue. Respondent has exhibited "tremendous" growth, to such 
extent that he secured employment at CART, performed well, and received an offer for 
a permanent substitute teaching position. 
43. California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80300, subdivision (b), lists 
aggravating factors, the presence of which indicate a greater degree of discipline is 
necessary to protect students and the teaching profession. Two pertinent factors are: 
(1) misconduct that evidences multiple acts of wrongdoing and demonstrates a 
pattern of misconduct; and (2) significant harm to a child entrusted to the care of a 
credential holder or applicant, the public, or the educational system. (at subds. 
(b)(2), (4).) 
Respondent’s failure to behave appropriately reflected negatively on the 
educational system, whose purpose is to train students to become well-adjusted, 
productive members of society. Contrary to that purpose, respondent’s actions 17 deprived A.D. of the opportunity to practice staying within the bounds of her role in 
society. However, complainant did not establish how respondent’s interactions with 
A.D., both in person and on Instagram, constitute discrete acts or a pattern of 
misconduct. Similarly, complainant did not establish whether any harm respondent 
caused rose to the level of significant harm. 
PRAISEWORTHINESS OR BLAMEWORTHINESS OF MOTIVES RESULTING IN THE 
MISCONDUCT  
44. Respondent's conduct was blameworthy in several respects. He crossed 
student-teacher boundaries with A.D. by discussing his personal life, gossiping about 
people at school, and giving her gifts such as boba and shorts. An insecure person, 
respondent was blinded by the validation A.D.'s attention brought. He failed to realize, 
at any point during his interactions with A.D., his conduct was inappropriate. As a 
result, his actions reflected negatively on the educational system’s charge to teach 
students how to behave appropriately and integrate into larger society. 
LIKELIHOOD OF RECURRENCE  
45. The likelihood of recurrence is minimal. Respondent was remorseful and 
admitted his failure as a teacher. To work on himself, he resigned from JGHS and 
immediately sought therapy. He learned how his personal experiences shaped his 
views on boundaries and appropriate behavior and now understands his desire to be 
liked cannot control his conduct. After almost two years of self-reflection and with 
therapeutic support, respondent felt ready to return to teaching and secured a 
position at CART, where he appears to be excelling. Respondent credibly testified he 
has taken this time in his life as a learning experience and has demonstrated 18 commendable improvement and insight. Thus, recurrence of respondent’s problematic 
conduct is unlikely. 
ADVERSE IMPACT OR CHILLING EFFECT 
46. There is no evidence that discipline would adversely impact or chill 
respondent or any other teacher in the free exercise of their constitutional rights.
PUBLICITY OR NOTORIETY OF MISCONDUCT
47. No evidence was presented that respondent’s conduct was publicized.
Based on the existence of school rumors, there is some evidence of notoriety.
CONCLUSION  
48. Respondent’s mitigating evidence is substantial and persuasive. He was 
remorseful and earnest in learning from his mistakes, receiving therapeutic support, 
and practicing what he has learned. He articulated his understanding of what caused 
his problematic conduct and continues to work with his therapist to critically evaluate 
himself. With insight, it would be unlikely for respondent’s inappropriate conduct to 
recur. Commendably, after focusing nearly two years on self-reflection and self-work, 
respondent was able to secure employment as a substitute teacher at another high 
school where his performance earned him an offer of a permanent substitute position.
49. However, while respondent has demonstrated insight and sustained and 
ongoing self-improvement, the clear and convincing evidence shows his boundary-
crossing conduct toward A.D. was unprofessional and unbecoming of a teacher. Thus, 
cause exists to discipline his credential based on that unprofessional conduct. 
Nevertheless, complainant did not establish respondent’s conduct rose to the level of 
immoral conduct or moral turpitude or demonstrated he is unfit to teach. His behavior 20 (2006) 139 Cal.App.4th 471, 476.) Preponderance of the evidence 
means “more likely than not.” ( (2002) 94 Cal.App.4th 
1378, 1388.)
Applicable Law
3. Pursuant to the Education Code, commencing with section 44000, and 
California Code of Regulations, title 5, commencing with section 80000, the 
Commission is responsible for credentialing teachers in public schools in California, 
including taking adverse action against applicants and credential holders. 
4. The Commission may privately admonish, publicly reprove, revoke, or 
suspend a credential for immoral or unprofessional conduct, evident unfitness of 
service, or any cause that would warrant denial of an application, such as an act 
involving moral turpitude. (Ed. Code, §§ 44345, subd. (e), 44421.) 
5. An aggravating factor is an event or circumstance that demonstrates a 
greater degree of discipline is necessary to adequately protect the public, 
schoolchildren, or the profession. Aggravating factors include multiple acts of 
wrongdoing, a pattern of misconduct, and misconduct significantly harming a child, 
the public, or educational system. (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80300.)
6. California Code of Regulations, title 5, 80302, subdivision (a), provides 
the factors to consider to ”determine the relationship between the alleged misconduct 
and the applicant’s or holder’s fitness, competence, or ability to effectively perform the 
duties authorized by the credential.” 
7. The California Supreme Court has recognized that the terms ”immoral 
conduct” and ”unprofessional conduct” substantially overlap one another and conduct 23 respondent’s credentials, certificates, and authorizations pursuant for acts of moral 
turpitude, pursuant to Education Code sections 44345, subdivision (e), and 44421. 
14. Complainant failed to establish, by clear and convincing evidence, 
respondent demonstrated evident unfitness for service. Thus, cause does not exist to 
discipline respondent’s credentials, certificates, and authorizations for evident 
unfitness for service, pursuant to Education Code section 44421. 
Cause for Denial of Application 
15. Respondent proved by a preponderance of the evidence he is entitled to 
reissuance of the permit he seeks. Complainant did not prove respondent committed
acts of moral turpitude. Thus, cause to deny his application does not exist pursuant to 
Education Code section 44345, subdivision (e).
Conclusion 
16. Discipline for unprofessional conduct can consist of private 
admonishment, public reproval, suspension of the credential, or revocation of the 
credential. (Ed. Code, § 44421.) As discussed above, when all the evidence is 
considered, a public reproval of respondent would adequately protect the public, 
students, and the profession. 
//
//24ORDER
Respondent Johnathen Blake Tonozzi is PUBLICLY REPROVED. His application 
for reissuance of his Emergency 30-Day Substitute Teaching Permit is GRANTED.
DATE: May 24, 2024 
PATRICE DE GUZMAN HUBER
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings
