BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 

In the Matter of the Accusation Against: 

JONATHAN DAVID MESISCA, 

Clear Multiple Subject Teaching Credential 

Preliminary Career Technical Education Teaching Credential 

Emergency 30-Day Substitute Teaching Credential 

Certificate of Clearance 

Preliminary Multiple Subject Teaching Credential 

Respondent. 

Agency Case No. 2-271483897 

OAH No. 2023040691 

PROPOSED DECISION 

Carmen D. Snuggs-Spraggins, Administrative Law Judge, Office of 

Administrative Hearings (OAH), State of California, heard this matter by 

videoconference on July 24, 2023. 

Mary Vixie Sandy, Ed.D. (Complainant), Executive Director of the California 

Commission on Teacher Credentialing (Commission) was represented by Diana 

Petikyan, Deputy Attorney General. 

Jonathan David Mesisca (Respondent) was represented by William Y. Sheh, 

Attorney at Law, Reich, Adell & Cvitan. 

Oral and documentary evidence was received. The record closed and the matter 

was submitted for decision on July 24, 2023. 

Protective Order 

At the hearing, the Complainant requested that Exhibits 2 and 3a be sealed. 

Exhibit 2 is a copy of a sexually explicit video depicting a minor whose face is exposed, 

and Exhibit 3a is a video of Instagram messages that contains the names of minor 

students. To prevent the disclosure of explicit and confidential information, the ALJ 

issued a Protective Order concurrent with this Proposed Decision placing Exhibits 2 

and 3a under seal following their use in the preparation of the Proposed Decision. 

These exhibits shall remain under seal and shall not be opened except by order of the 

Commission, OAH, or a reviewing court. A reviewing court, parties to this matter, their 

attorneys, or a government agency decision maker or designee under Government 

Code section 11517 may review the documents subject to the Protective Order, 

provided that such documents are protected from release to the public. 

SUMMARY 

Complainant seeks to revoke Respondent’s teaching credential based on 

allegations of immoral conduct, unprofessional conduct, evident unfitness for service, 

2 

and moral turpitude relating to Respondent’s conduct during the fall of 2020. 

Complainant proved Respondent, while teaching at a high school, sent a video of a 

minor female engaged in a sexual act to a student. 

Respondent does not dispute the allegations of the Accusation. He asserts that 

his intent in sending the video was to determine whether the person in video was a 

student who attended the high school where Respondent was teaching, and whether 

the student video knew about the video so that she could remove it from the internet. 

Respondent has no history of prior discipline, and he submitted evidence of 

rehabilitation and mitigation. 

The evidence demonstrates Respondent’s lapse in judgment resulted in 

egregious misconduct. However, the revocation of Respondent’s credentials because 

of such misconduct would be unduly punitive considering Respondent’s reputation as 

a stellar teacher. Because public protection, not punishment, is the primary goal of 

these proceedings and because Respondent is in a position of trust as a teacher in 

daily contact with a vulnerable student population, stayed revocation and a period of 

probation with appropriate conditions to protect students and the educational 

community is warranted in this matter. 

FACTUAL FINDINGS 

Jurisdictional Matters 

1. 

On July 19, 2018, the Commission issued a Clear Multiple Subject 

Teaching Credential to Respondent. The Clear Multiple Subject Teaching Credential 

will expire on August 1, 2028, unless renewed. On February 28, 2020, the Commission 

issued a Preliminary Career Technical Education Teaching Credential to Respondent. 

3 

The Preliminary Career Technical Education Teaching Credential expired on March 1, 

2023. 

2. 

Respondent previously held the following certification documents: 

Emergency 30-Day Substitute Teaching Credential, issued on September 1, 2008, and 

expired on August 1, 2019 (held intermittently); Certificate of Clearance, issued on 

August 13, 2007, and expired on August 1, 2013; and Preliminary Multiple Subject 

Teaching Credential, issued on June 30, 2008 and expired on July 1, 2013. 

3. 

The expiration of any credential does not deprive the Commission of its 

authority to institute or continue a disciplinary proceeding against a credential holder 

or enter an order suspending or revoking the credential. (Ed. Code, § 44440, subd. (b).) 

“Credential” is any credential, certificate, certificate of clearance or other document 

which authorizes the holder to perform services which require certification and was 

issued by the Commission. (Cal. Code Reg., tit. 5, § 80300, subd. (g).) 

4. 

On December 1, 2021, the Commission informed Respondent that it was 

in receipt of information requiring an investigation of his fitness to hold a credential 

and that the matter would be considered by the Commission of Credentials 

(Committee). On April 29, 2022, the Commission informed Respondent that the 

Committee found probable cause existed to recommend issuance of a public reproval. 

5. 

On July 29, 2022, the Commission informed Respondent that at its June 

16-17, 2022 meeting, the Commission voted to remand Respondent’s matter back to 

the Committee. At its July 20-22, 2022 meeting, the Committee reconsidered 

Respondent’s matter and recommended revocation of his teaching credentials and all 

certification documents. 

6. 

Respondent timely requested an administrative hearing. 

4 

7. 

Complainant, in her official capacity, served the Accusation on 

Respondent on February 2, 2023. The Accusation seeks to revoke all credentials, 

certificates, and authorizations issued to Respondent or take other appropriate 

adverse action in response to Respondent’s conduct in the fall of 2020. 

8. 

On February 9, 2023, Respondent timely filed a Notice of Defense. 

9. 

All jurisdictional requirements have been met. 

General Background 

10. 

Respondent obtained bachelor’s and master’s degrees from the 

University of Southern California (USC), and he is currently in the process of obtaining 

his administrative services credential from USC. He is married and has a three-year-old 

daughter. He currently works as a high school drama teacher with the Hacienda-La 

Puente Unified School District. At all times relevant to the allegations in the 

Accusation, Respondent worked as a drama teacher and taught a screenwriting course 

at John Glen High School (JGHS) within the Norwalk-La Mirada School District 

(District). 

11. 

Respondent was rated as proficient in all areas, meaning he met or 

exceeded expectations, on his Teacher Evaluations from the District for the period 

from August 15, 2018, to May 3, 2019. (Ex. A.) Ten of Respondent’s former students 

wrote letters of appreciation and thank you notes in 2019 and 2021 describing 

Respondent as supportive, motivating, positive, hardworking, and a role model. (Ex. B.) 

He was awarded the Teacher of the Year Award by JGHS for the 2021-2022 school 

year. (Ex. D.) Several teachers and two assistant principals, both from JGHS, submitted 

letters attesting to Respondent’s dedication to his students and effectiveness as a 

teacher while at JGHS and in New York. The letters written by the JGHS assistant 

5 

principals are dated April 16, 2019, and June 1, 2021. (Ex. C.) One of Respondent’s 

former students and former president of the drama club at JGHS, wrote a letter to the 

Commission pursuant to Respondent’s request. The student described Respondent as 

easy-going and professional and attributed the success of the theater department to 

Respondent. The student denied that Respondent ever made inappropriate comments 

to or about students. (Ex. E.) Respondent has no history of discipline by the District or 

the Commission. 

12.  On February 3, 2021, the District became aware of allegations concerning 

Respondent’s comments and communications to students, including the provision of a 

pornographic video to JGHS student BT. (Students and their parents are identified by 

their initials for privacy purposes.) The video contained a sex scene involving a minor. 

13. 

Respondent was placed on administrative leave of absence beginning 

February 3, 2021, while the District conducted an investigation of the allegations of 

misconduct. 

14.  On June 17, 2021, the District notified Respondent that its Governing 

Board had decided not to re-employ him for the 2021-2022 school year. 

Evidence of the Alleged Misconduct 

15.  On November 17, 2020, Respondent messaged student BT on Instagram 

inquiring whether student BT knew student KM and her boyfriend. Respondent then 

informed student BT that he saw an inappropriate video purportedly depicting student 

KM. BT inquired whether the video was a "P vid" - to which Respondent replied, "Well, 

it's the girl pressed up against the sink (clothed) but yes . . . Screaming - tell me I'm 

better than B." (Ex. 3, p. 40.) 

6 

16. 

Respondent subsequently sent student BT a screenshot of the video, 

informed student BT not to take screenshots, and told BT that the female in the video 

resembled student KM. Respondent then asked student BT if she wanted to see the 

video as follows: "You want to see it? But delete right away. Don't save it. Okay. Go to 

quiet [sic] place or plug headphones in. Adult Language and content." (Ex. 3, p. A43.) 

17. 

Student BT did not immediately reply to Respondent’s messages, but 

Respondent still sent student BT the full video. 

18. 

After sending the video, Respondent messaged student BT several times 

asking questions in attempt to determine if student KM was in the video including 

whether student BT recognized the sink that can be seen in the video. Student BT 

replied that she recalled an incident where student KM and her boyfriend went into 

student BT’s bathroom. Respondent asked student BT to take a picture of her sink and 

also asked student BT to not “say anything,” to which student BT replied that she 

would not. 

19. 

Respondent asked student BT if she was “convinced” the person in the 

video was student KM. (Ex. 3, p. A46.) Respondent also asked, "she's what 15?" in 

reference to student KM, followed by a series of three flushed face emoji icons. (Ibid.) 

DISTRICT INVESTIGATION 

20.  Mike Garcia, the District’s Director of Human Resources, testified at the 

hearing. He explained that the District’s investigation was conducted from February 

2021 to June 2021. Mr. Garcia did not recall whether anyone from the District 

interviewed Respondent as part of its investigation. 

/// 

7 

21. 

According to Mr. Garcia, Respondent’s contract with the District 

terminated on June 3, 2021. Because of Respondent’s inappropriate communications 

with student BT, District elected not to have Respondent return to the District. 

LOS ANGELES COUNTY SHERIFF’S DEPARTMENT INVESTIGATION 

22.  On February 3, 2021, the District notified the Los Angeles County Sheriff’s 

Department (LACSD) of the allegations. LACSD Detective Larry Flores investigated the 

allegations of misconduct from February 3, 2021, through July 28, 2021, and prepared 

a report of his findings. (Exhibit 3.) As part of his investigation, Detective Flores 

interviewed student BT, Sharon Cruz, JGHS’s Assistant Principal, and Mike Garcia, the 

Director of Human Resources for the District, and issued a search warrant to obtain 

Instagram messages between student BT and Respondent and the videos that had 

been exchanged. 

23. 

Student BT provided Detective Flores with a digital copy of the 

conversation between her and Respondent. Detective was unable to review the video 

Respondent sent to student BT because it did not load. The results of the search 

warrant did not include conversations between student BT and Respondent. However, 

Detective Flores observed a screen shot from the video which showed “a young female 

bent over laying across an unknown object.” Ex. 3, p.A33.) 

24. 

Based upon Detective Flores’ investigation, he determined Respondent 

distributed obscene mater of a minor in violation of Penal Code section 311.2, 

subdivision (d), and provided information from his investigation to the District 

Attorney. The District Attorney declined to press charges against Respondent. 

/// 

8 

COMMISSION INVESTIGATION 

25.  On July 16, 2021, the District notified the Commission of the allegations 

of misconduct against Respondent. A Commission Investigator investigated the 

allegations by interviewing student KM, MM (KM’s father), and student BT, and 

prepared Confidential Investigative Reports. (Exs. 6 and 7.) (The interview summaries 

contained in the reports constitute administrative hearsay; thus, under Government 

Code section 11513, subdivision (d), their contents are considered only to the extent 

they supplement or explain direct evidence.) 

26. 

Respondent provided a written statement to the Commission. 

Respondent wrote the following in his statement: 

[¶] . . . [¶] 

When I saw the video, I reached out to one of her close 

friends, [BT], out of concern for [KM]. At the time, I had a 

newborn baby at home, who was my first child, and all I 

could think about was if it had been my child in this crude 

video that had been posted to Reddit. I did not want that 

video to circulate the internet because I knew that [KM] 

wanted a career in the arts and I was not positive whether 

the individual in the video was her or not. The people in the 

video were all fully clothed. However, there was some 

suggestive dialogue in the video, I told [BT] that the content 

was crude in nature, and I expressed to her my concern 

regarding whether it was [KM] in the video or not. To be 

honest, I was in a complete state of shock when I saw the 

9 

video and this whole incident occurred within a matter of 

minutes because I was truly concerned about [KM], and I 

wanted to make sure it was her in the video before I 

pursued the matter any further. After months and months 

of isolation, virtual communication, and makeshift protocols 

of advisement from school leadership, which affected my 

judgment because, among other things, everything seemed 

a bit more detached when dealing with people virtually, I 

stupidly sent the video to [BT]. As an adult and educator, I 

should not have done so, and I regret any harm that I 

caused in sending the video to [BT]. In sending the video 

clip, however, there was absolutely no inappropriate intent 

on my part. Instead, I reached out because I was concerned 

whether my former student, [KM], was the individual in this 

video. There was nothing malicious or sexual in my intent or 

motives. 

. . . My honest intention was to get the video taken down, 

by whoever had posted it or by Reddit, if it turned out that 

it was my former student in the video. I went about it the 

wrong way, and to this day I live wishing that I would have 

taken more time to process the whole situation in a more 

thoughtful manner, with my brain, instead of immediately 

reacting to the situation, with my heart, without taking the 

time to think things over or consult with my wife first, 

because I was concerned about my former student. 

10 

(Ex. 7, pp. A90-A91.) 

Allegations of Aggravating Factors 

27. 

A. 

Complainant alleged and established the following as aggravating 

factors for consideration when determining the appropriate level of discipline in this 

case: 

B. 

Respondent misconduct constitutes multiple acts of wrongdoing 

and demonstrated a pattern of misconduct. 

C. 

Respondent misconduct was surrounded by a violation of the law 

governing educators. 

D. 

Respondent did not establish that Respondent’s misconduct was 

surrounded by or followed by bad faith or dishonesty, Respondent’s misconduct 

significantly harmed a child entrusted to his care, or that Respondent demonstrated 

indifference toward the consequence of his misconduct. 

Respondent’s Evidence 

28. 

Respondent’s testimony at the hearing regarding how he happened upon 

the video and why he sent it to student BT was consistent with his written statement to 

the Board described in Factual Finding 26. He asserted that he told student BT not to 

save a screenshot of the video because he did not want her to save it and circulate it. 

After his text exchange with student BT, he did not communicate whether any further 

about the video. 

29. 

Respondent called his friend and mentor Christopher Leach, who is also a 

teacher in New York, and disclosed his interactions with student BT. According to 

11 

 
 
 
Respondent, Mr. Leach told him that he should not have sent the video to student BT, 

and Respondent agreed. Similarly, Respondent disclosed his interactions with student 

BT to his wife when she returned home from work. Respondent’s wife was not 

convinced that it was student KM in the video but understood why Respondent 

thought it could be. 

30. 

Respondent did not communicate with student KM about the video 

because after “the smoke settled,” it was determined that it was not her and he did not 

feel the need to proceed any further. 

31. 

Respondent continued teaching after being let go from the District. He 

taught theater and Honors English to high school students in the Irvine Unified School 

District for one year. Respondent then worked as a theater teacher for seventh and 

eighth grade students for one year in the Saddleback Valley Unified School District. He 

did not inform the administrators at his current school district nor the administrators 

at the Irvine and Saddleback Valley Unified School Districts about the incident at JGHS. 

32. 

Since leaving JGHS, Respondent won an award for the best play in 

Orange County and his students were voted the best ensemble. Respondent has not 

been disciplined or received any student complaints since the incident with student BT. 

33. 

Respondent wants to continue to work in the education field. He intends 

to study for and take the exam to obtain his administrator’s credential. Respondent 

asserted that he would like to use his skills and passion to make a positive impact on 

teachers and students. 

/// 

/// 

12 

CHARACTER EVIDENCE 

34. 

Jenifer Mesisca has been married to Respondent for five years and 

testified on Respondent’s behalf. Mrs. Mesisca became familiar with student KM when 

Mrs. Mesisca she worked on costumes and choreography for the drama department in 

2018. 

35.  When Mrs. Mesisca arrived home on November 17, 2020, Respondent 

appeared distraught. According to Mrs. Mesisca, Respondent stated he had made a 

mistake and did something he should not have. He explained that he saw student KM 

in a video on Reddit and sent it to another student to ask if the student also thought it 

was student KM. 

36. 

Respondent showed Mrs. Mesisca the video and his text exchange with 

student BT. Mrs. Mesisca saw the resemblance between student KM and the person in 

the video but did not believe it was student KM and told Respondent so. 

37.  Mrs. Mesisca agreed that Respondent made a mistake in sending the 

video to student BT. In her opinion, it appeared as if Respondent was responding to 

the video as a peer and not a teacher. Mrs. Mesisca believes Respondent was sincere 

in his belief that the person in the video may have been student KM. She denied that 

Respondent had malintent and believes he was genuinely concerned about whether 

the video was posted without student KM’s knowledge, and the potential 

consequences to student KM of having a video like that posted on the internet. 

38. 

Christopher Leach, who testified on Respondent’s behalf, has been in a 

teacher with the New York City of Department of Education for 24 years, and has been 

an elementary school physical education teacher for 15 years. He has known 

Respondent since 2009, when they worked in New York for four years. During that 

13 

time, he interacted with Respondent daily during recess and lunch, and observed 

Respondent teaching drama students. Mr. Leach also assisted Respondent with drama 

rehearsals. 

39.  Mr. Leach described Respondent as a great teacher who was loved by 

everyone and had a good rapport with students and parents. 

40. 

Respondent sent Mr. Leach a text about his interactions with student BT 

the day it occurred. Respondent told Mr. Leach that he saw a video on the internet of 

an individual who might have been his student engaged in “some kind of activity.” Mr. 

Leach stated that Respondent also told him that he notified a friend of the student of 

what Respondent saw. He does not recall if Respondent described the video or the 

messages to student BT. 

41.  Mr. Leach advised Respondent that what he did “was not a good idea.” 

Mr. Leach asserted that he believed Respondent thought he was acting in the best 

interest of the student and was trying to help her. Mr. Leach believed Respondent 

acted out of haste and did not have any ill intent. 

42.  Mr. Leach denied any concerns regarding Respondent retaining his 

credential and stated he would not hesitate to work with Respondent in the future. 

43. 

Kevin Somers, who testified on Respondent’s behalf, was Respondent’s 

college roommate and has known Respondent for 19 years. They have remained in 

contact over the years and Respondent has talked to him about his work as a drama 

teacher. 

44. 

Respondent told Mr. Somers that he sent a video to a student while 

acting in the best interest of another student, and that he made a mistake. Respondent 

14 

did not describe the video to Mr. Somers and Mr. Somers did not ask. Respondent did 

not tell Mr. Somers that the video was sexual in nature nor did he describe the 

messages to student BT However, he does not believe Respondent was motivated by 

improper intent. 

45.  Mr. Somers described Respondent as dedicated to his job and being a 

teacher, honest, and a good father and husband. 

46. 

Peter Mares, who testified on Respondent’s behalf, is a fourth-grade 

teacher with the Santa Ana Unified School District (SAUSD) and has worked for SAUSD 

for 25 years. He has known Respondent for 14 years and met him when they were 

fourth grade teachers during the 2008-2009 school year. 

47.  Mr. Mares has observed Respondent’s interactions with students in the 

past. He described Respondent as responsible, positive, friendly, motivating to 

students, and caring. 

48.  Mr. Mares is aware that Respondent sent an inappropriate video to a 

student’s friend. Respondent did not describe the video or his messages to BT to Mr. 

Mares. Respondent told Mr. Mares that he was concerned about the student because 

the video was compromising, and he wanted the student to know about the video so 

that she could get the video removed from the internet. Mr. Mares believes that 

Respondent’s motives were good because he is a compassionate enthusiastic and 

caring person who likes to help people. 

49.  Mr. Mares stated he would have no concern if Respondent retained his 

credential and that he would love to work with Respondent again. 

/// 

15 

LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 

Burden and Standard of Proof 

1. 

Complainant is required to prove cause for discipline of a teaching 

permit by “clear and convincing proof to a reasonable certainty.” (Ettinger v. Board of 

Medical Quality Assurance (1982) 135 Cal.App.3d 853, 856.) To the extent Respondent 

contends mitigation or rehabilitation, it is his burden to prove those contentions by a 

preponderance of the evidence. (Evid. Code, §§ 115, 500.) 

2. 

For purposes of teacher discipline, conduct cannot be characterized as 

immoral, unprofessional, or involving moral turpitude unless it indicates a teacher is 

unfit to teach. (Morrison v. State Board of Education (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 229 

(Morrison).) In making this determination, the Commission may consider such matters 

as: “(1) The likelihood that the conduct may have adversely affected students, fellow 

teachers, or the educational community, and the degree of such adversity anticipated; 

[¶] (2) The proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct; [¶] (3) The type of 

credential held or applied for by the person involved; [¶] (4) The extenuating or 

aggravating circumstances surrounding the conduct; [¶] (5) The praiseworthiness or 

blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the conduct; [¶] (6) The likelihood of the 

recurrence of the questioned conduct; [¶] (7) The extent to which disciplinary action 

may inflict an adverse impact or chilling effect upon the constitutional rights of the 

person involved, or other certified persons; [¶] (8) The publicity or notoriety given to 

the conduct.” (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80302, subd. (a); Morrison, supra, 1 Cal.3d at p. 

229.) Not all Morrison factors need be examined to determine fitness to teach, only 

the pertinent ones. (West Valley–Mission Community College Dist. v. Concepcion 

(1993) 16 Cal.App.4th 1766, 1777.) 

16 

First Cause for Discipline (Unprofessional Conduct) 

3. 

The Commission may discipline the credential of a person who commits 

unprofessional conduct. (Ed. Code, (Code) § 44421; see § 44345.) 

4. 

“Unprofessional conduct” is conduct that “violates the rules or ethical 

code of a profession or such conduct which is unbecoming a member of a profession 

in good standing.” (Board of Education v. Swan (1953) 41 Cal.2d 546, 553 [citation 

omitted], overruled, in part, on another ground in Bekiaris v. Board of Education (1972) 

6 Cal.3d 575, 588, fn. 7.) 

5. 

On November 7, 2020, Respondent sent student BT a screen shot from a 

video depicting a minor female engaged in a sexual act, and then sent the student BT 

the full video despite acknowledging that the video contained adult language and 

content. (Factual Findings 15-26 and 29.) These acts were unbecoming of a teacher 

and constitute unprofessional conduct. Cause was established to discipline 

Respondent’s credentials under section 44421, based on unprofessional conduct. 

Second Cause for Discipline (Immoral Conduct) 

6.     The Commission may discipline the credential of a person who commits 

acts of immoral conduct. (§ 44421.) “The term ‘immoral’ has been defined generally as 

that which is hostile to the welfare of the general public and contrary to good morals.” 

(Board of Education v. Weiland (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811 [citation omitted].) 

7. 

Respondent’s act of sending to student BT a screen shot from a video 

depicting a minor female engaged in a sexual act, and then sending student BT the full 

video despite acknowledging that the video contained adult language and content, 

constitutes immoral conduct under section 44421. (Factual Findings 15-26 and 29.) 

17 

Cause was established to discipline Respondent’s credentials under section 44421, 

based on his acts of immoral conduct. 

Third Cause of Discipline (Evident Unfitness for Service) 

8. 

Evident unfitness for service properly means “clearly not fit, not adapted 

to or unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of temperamental defects or 

inadequacies. [Fn. omitted.]” (Woodland Joint Unified School Dist. v. Commission on 

Professional Competence (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444 (Woodland).) This cause for 

discipline connotes a “fixed character trait, presumably not remediable merely on 

receipt of notice that one’s conduct fails to meet the expectations of the employing 

school district.” (Ibid.) On this cause for discipline, the criteria for unfitness in Morrison 

“must be analyzed to determine, as a threshold matter, whether the cited conduct 

indicates unfitness for service. [Citation.] If the Morrison criteria indicate unfitness to 

teach, the next step is to determine whether the ‘unfitness’ is ‘evident’; i.e., whether the 

offensive conduct is caused by a defect in temperament.” (Woodland, supra, 2 

Cal.App.4th at p. 1445.) For instance, a teacher’s removal of school property (a public 

address system speaker) from the classroom wall may be considered evidence of 

evident unfitness for service. (Palo Verde etc. Sch. Dist. v. Hensey (1970) 9 Cal.App.3d 

967, 973.) 

9. 

Although Respondent’s actions were unprofessional, Complainant did 

not establish by clear and convincing evidence they were the result of a 

temperamental defect or fixed character trait that cannot be remedied. (See 

Woodland, supra, 2 Cal.App.4th at pp. 1444-1445.) Respondent displayed poor 

judgment in initiating Instagram messages with student BT on November 17, 2020, 

regarding his suspicion that student KM was depicted in the sexually explicit video, 

and then sending student BT both a screenshot from the video depicting a minor 

18 

female and the full video despite acknowledging that the video contained adult 

language and content. (Factual Findings 15-26 and 29.) However, Respondent has no 

prior disciplinary history, and Complainant presented no evidence of a pattern of 

similar behavior. Respondent established through the letters written by colleagues that 

he does not possess any deviant personality trait, or defect of character that makes 

him unsuitable for teaching. Cause was not established by clear and convincing to 

discipline Respondent’s credentials under sections 44421 for evident unfitness for 

service. 

Fourth Cause for Discipline (Moral Turpitude) 

10. 

The Commission may discipline the credential of a person who commits 

acts of moral turpitude. (§§ 44421, 44345, subd. (e).) Moral turpitude has also been 

described as “any crime or misconduct committed without excuse, or any ‘dishonest or 

immoral’ act not necessarily a crime.” (Clerici v. Department of Motor Vehicles (1990) 

224 Cal.App.3d 1016, 1027.) 

11. 

Respondent’s acts of sending to student BT a screen shot from a video 

depicting a minor female engaged in a sexual act, and then sending student BT the full 

video despite acknowledging that the video contained adult language and content 

constitutes acts of moral turpitude in that it was an immoral act not necessarily a 

crime. (Factual Findings 15-26 and 29.) Cause was established by clear and convincing 

evidence to discipline his credentials under sections 44421 and 44345, subdivision (e), 

for acts of moral turpitude. 

Morrison Factors 

12. 

Pursuant to Morrison, the Commission shall determine whether a 

teacher's conduct indicates such unfitness to teach as to warrant disciplinary action. 

19 

13. 

The first Morrison factor focuses on the “likelihood” the conduct “may 

have” adversely affected students, teachers, or the educational community, and the 

degree of adversity anticipated. (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80302, subd. (a.) Although 

here was no direct evidence that students KM or BT were harmed as they did not 

testify at the hearing, and there was no other direct evidence of how Respondent’s 

conduct affected them, it is likely that Respondent’s conduct adversely affected the 

students. This factor suggests unfitness to teach. 

14. 

Respondent’s conduct was committed less than three years go. 

Therefore, it was not remote in time. (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80302, subd. (a)(2).) This 

factor suggests unfitness. 

15. 

Respondent holds a clear multiple subject teaching credential. (Cal. Code 

Regs., tit. 5, § 80302, subd. (a)(3).) Respondent’s credentials allow him to teach high 

school students for whom he must serve as an appropriate role model. As these 

students are not as particularly impressionable as elementary and middle school 

children, this factor does not suggest unfitness. 

16. 

The fourth Morrison factor examines the extenuating or aggravating 

circumstances surrounding the conduct. (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80302, subd. (a)(4).) 

“Aggravating factors” are circumstances demonstrating that a greater degree of 

adverse action is needed to adequately protect the public, schoolchildren, or the 

profession, including a prior record of adverse action; that the misconduct evidences 

multiple acts of wrongdoing or demonstrates a pattern of misconduct; that the 

misconduct significantly harmed a child entrusted to the care of the credential holder; 

and that the holder or applicant had prior notice, warnings or reprimands for similar 

conduct from any reliable source. (§ 80300, subd. (b).) Respondent committed multiple 

20 

acts of wrongdoing and his misconduct violated the law governing educators. These 

are aggravating circumstances. 

17. 

“Mitigating factors” are circumstances demonstrating that the public, 

schoolchildren, and the profession would be adequately protected by a more lenient 

degree of adverse action. (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80300, subd. (m).) Potential 

mitigating factors include: (1) absence of any prior record of adverse action over many 

years of educational service, coupled with present misconduct which is not deemed 

most serious; (2) lack of harm to the person who is the object of the misconduct; (3) 

emotional or physical difficulties suffered by the holder which substantially 

contributed to the misconduct, provided that the difficulties were not the product of 

illegal conduct such as illegal substance abuse, and further provided that the holder 

has established through clear and convincing evidence that he or she no longer has 

such difficulties; (4) attestations to the holder’s good character by individuals from the 

educational or general community who are aware of the extent of the holder’s 

misconduct; (5) objective action by the holder, spontaneously demonstrating remorse 

at the time of the misconduct, and recognition of the wrongdoing designed to timely 

make amends; (6) proximity or remoteness in time of the misconduct relative to the 

seriousness of the misconduct; and (7) the nature and extent of subsequent 

rehabilitation. (Ibid.) 

18. 

Respondent has shown mitigating factors. Respondent has no previous 

or subsequent record of teacher discipline. The formal evaluations of his teaching 

show his teaching performance has always met or exceeded expectations. Respondent 

provided supporting character testimony and letters. Also mitigating is Respondent’s 

deletion of the video and cessation of communication with student BT immediately 

21 

after sending the Instagram messages. In further mitigation, Respondent disclosed his 

conduct with his wife and mentor and sought their advice. 

19. 

Although he exercised extremely poor judgment, Respondent’s behavior 

was not motivated by any malicious intent in that Respondent suspected student KM 

was included in the sexually explicit video that had been uploaded to the internet 

unbeknownst to her and wanted to warn her about it if that was indeed the case. (Cal. 

Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80302, subd. (a)(5).) 

20. 

Based upon the evidence in the record, it appears unlikely that 

Respondent will reoffend. (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80302, subd. (a)(6).) He evidenced 

significant remorse for and insight into the wrongfulness of his conduct. 

21. 

Disciplinary action against Respondent would not inflict an adverse 

impact or chilling effect on Respondent or others, because there is no constitutionally 

protected speech or behavior in the conduct at issue. (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80302, 

subd. (a)(7).) 

22. 

There is no evidence of notoriety in Respondent’s local community about 

this conduct. (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80302, subd. (a)(8).) 

23. 

Application of the Morrison factors in this matter establishes that 

Respondent’s conduct indicates such unfitness to teach as to warrant disciplinary 

action. 

Determination of Discipline and Application 

24. 

Cause for discipline having been established, the remaining question is 

what level of discipline is necessary to protect the public, schoolchildren, and the 

22 

profession. The Commission may privately admonish, publicly reprove, suspend, or 

revoke the credential of a credential holder. (§ 44421.) 

25. 

Respondent’s conduct was serious and not remote in time. However, his 

teaching performance has been rated positively throughout his career. Respondent 

appears to be a good candidate for probation and outright revocation of his credential 

is not necessary to protect the public. Revocation, stayed with a three-year period of 

probation, will be sufficient to ensure protection of students, the public, and the 

profession. 

ORDER 

The credentials issued to Respondent Jonathan Mesisca are revoked. However, 

the revocation is stayed and Respondent is placed on probation for three years subject 

to the following terms and conditions: 

1. 

Severability Clause: Each condition of probation contained herein is a 

separate and distinct condition. If any condition of probation, or part thereof, or any 

application thereof, is declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be 

unenforceable in whole or in part, or to any extent, the remaining conditions of 

probation, and each of them, and all other applications thereof, shall not be affected. 

Each condition of probation herein shall be separately valid and enforceable to the 

fullest extent permitted by law. 

2. 

New Credentials Subject to Order: Any new credential issued by the 

Commission to Respondent during the period of probation shall be subject to this 

order, and Respondent shall be subject to the same terms and conditions of probation 

with respect to any such new credentials, as set forth herein. 

23 

3. 

Compliance with Probation: Respondent shall fully comply with each and 

every term and condition of probation. During the entire period of probation, 

Respondent shall submit quarterly declarations under penalty of perjury, on forms 

provided by the Commission, stating whether there has been full compliance with the 

terms and conditions of probation. Respondent shall submit a full and detailed 

description of any violation of any term or condition of probation on the quarterly 

declaration. Respondent shall submit the quarterly declarations not later than 10 days 

after the end of each quarter which, for purposes of this term and condition, are: 

March 31st, June 30th, September 30th, and December 31st. 

4. 

Cooperation with Commission: During the entire period of probation, 

Respondent shall fully cooperate with the Commission in its monitoring and 

investigation of Respondent’s compliance with probation. 

5. 

Interviews with Commission: During the entire period of probation, 

Respondent shall be available for interviews either in person or by telephone, with or 

without prior notice, with the Commission. 

6. 

Notification: Within five days of the effective date of this order, 

Respondent shall provide a true and correct copy of this decision, together with a true 

and correct copy of the First Amended Accusation, to Respondent’s employer as 

defined by the California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80300, subdivision (j), if 

any, and to Respondent’s immediate supervisor at that employer. Within five days of 

complying with this notification requirement, Respondent shall submit proof of 

compliance to the Commission. 

If Respondent changes employment at any time during probation, Respondent 

shall again comply with this notification requirement within seven days of accepting 

24 

new employment and shall again submit proof of compliance to the Commission, as 

required herein, within five days of complying with this notification requirement. 

Respondent shall comply with this notification requirement, and proof of compliance, 

as described herein, each and every time Respondent changes employment during the 

probationary period. 

Within seven days of this order, Respondent shall also notify the Commission in 

writing of the name and address of the current employer with whom Respondent has 

contracted or is otherwise engaged to perform education services. Respondent shall 

provide this same information to the Commission within seven days of any change in 

employment and, in addition, shall also provide a full and complete explanation of the 

facts and circumstances surrounding the cessation of employment with the former 

employer. 

7. 

Maintain Active, Current Credentials: During the entire period of 

probation, Respondent shall maintain active, current credentials with the Commission, 

including during any period of suspension. 

8. 

Maintain Current Contact Information: Within seven days of the effective 

date of this order, Respondent shall notify the Commission of a current mailing 

address, current email address, and current telephone number where voicemail or text 

messages may be left. Within 72 hours of any change of mailing address, email 

address, or telephone number, Respondent shall notify the Commission of the new 

mailing address, email address, and telephone number. 

9. 

Obey All Laws: Respondent shall obey all federal, state, and local laws, 

including all laws governing the education profession in California, and shall remain in 

25 

full compliance with all court orders, criminal probation, or parole, and shall make all 

court-ordered payments. 

Except for minor traffic infractions, within 72 hours of any incident resulting in 

Respondent’s arrest, the filing of any criminal charges, or citation issued, Respondent 

shall submit a full and detailed description of the incident to the Commission. For 

purposes of this condition, a “minor traffic infraction” includes only traffic violations 

which are punishable by a maximum fine of $250, and do not subject the offender to 

incarceration or probation. (See Veh. Code, § 42001; Pen. Code, §§ 17, subd. (d), 19.6, 

and 19.8.) 

Within 72 hours of receiving notice of any violation of any court order, criminal 

probation or parole, or failure to make any court-ordered payment, Respondent shall 

submit a full and detailed description of the incident to the Commission. 

To permit monitoring of Respondent’s compliance with this condition, 

Respondent shall ensure that fingerprints are on file with the Commission. 

Respondents residing outside of California can also comply with this fingerprint 

requirement by submitting, within 30 days of the effective date of this order, two 

fingerprint cards (FD-258) and payment of the additional applicable fingerprint fee. 

10. 

Violation of Probation: Failure to fully comply with any term or condition 

of probation, or any part thereof, shall constitute a violation of probation. If 

Respondent violates any term or condition of probation, or any part thereof, in any 

respect, the matter will be referred to the Office of the Attorney General for 

preparation of a Petition to Revoke Probation. After giving Respondent notice and an 

opportunity to be heard, the Commission may revoke probation and impose the order 

that was stayed, i.e., revocation of Respondent’s credentials. If a Petition to Revoke 

26 

Probation is filed against Respondent during probation, or the Attorney General’s 

Office has been asked to prepare a Petition to Revoke Probation against Respondent, 

the Commission shall have continuing jurisdiction until the matter is final, and the 

period of probation shall be automatically extended until the matter is final. 

Respondent’s credentials may also be subject to immediate suspension for any 

specified violation of probation as provided in this order. If Respondent does not 

comply with any part of a probation condition that includes a consequence of 

suspension for failure to comply, the Commission will notify Respondent in writing 

that Respondent’s credentials are immediately suspended. Thereafter, the suspension 

of Respondent’s credentials shall not be lifted until the effective date of a final 

decision of the Commission on a Petition to Revoke Probation to be filed against 

Respondent. 

If a Petition to Revoke Probation is not filed against Respondent within 30 days 

of issuance of the written notification from the Commission to Respondent that 

Respondent’s credentials are immediately suspended, or Respondent is not provided 

with an administrative hearing within 30 days of a written request for a hearing, unless 

Respondent stipulates to a later hearing, the suspension shall be dissolved. The 

deadlines established herein shall be computed pursuant to the provisions of sections 

12 through 12c of the Code of Civil Procedure. Where an original suspension has 

dissolved, nothing shall prohibit issuance of another suspension for any additional or 

subsequent violation by Respondent as a condition of probation. 

/// 

/// 

/// 

27 

11. 

Completion of Probation: Upon completion of probation, Respondent’s 

credentials shall be fully restored. 

DATE: 

CARMEN D. SNUGGS-SPRAGGINS 

Administrative Law Judge 

Office of Administrative Hearings 

28 

08/23/2023 
 
 
