BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
In the Matter of the Accusation and Statement of Issues 
Against: 
BLANCA MARIE QUINTANA, Respondent 
Agency Case No. 2-115848793 
OAH No. 2023080219 
PROPOSED DECISION 
Administrative Law Judge Coren D. Wong, Office of Administrative Hearings, 
State of California, heard this matter by videoconference on December 11, 2023, from 
Sacramento, California.
Phillip L. Arthur, Deputy Attorney General, represented complainant Mary Vixie 
Sandy, Ed.D., Executive Director of the California Commission on Teacher Credentialing 
(Commission).
Respondent Blanca Marie Quintana represented herself. 
Evidence was received, the record closed, and the matter submitted for decision 
on December 11, 2023. 2 FACTUAL FINDINGS
Jurisdictional Matters 
1. The Commission issued respondent a child development assistant permit 
on December 20, 2010. The permit expired six years later and has not been renewed.
2. The Commission issued respondent a child development teacher permit 
on August 17, 2012. The permit expired five years later and has not been renewed.
3. The Commission issued respondent a child development site supervisor 
permit on the February 10, 2016. The permit expired five years later and has not been 
renewed. 
4. The Commission issued respondent a 30-day substitute teaching permit 
on October 20, 2016. The permit expired four years later and has not been renewed. 
5. Respondent signed and submitted to the Commission an application for 
a 30-day substitute teaching permit on May 23, 2022. The Commission’s Committee of 
Credentials (Committee) reviewed the application and determined probable cause 
existed to recommend that the Commission deny the application.
6. The term “credential” includes “any credential, certificate, life document, 
life diploma, permit, certificate of clearance, or waiver, or other document which 
authorizes the holder to perform services which require certification and was issued by 
the Commission.” (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80300, subd. (g).) The expiration of a 
credential does not deprive the Commission of jurisdiction to discipline the credential. 
(Ed. Code, § 44440, subd. (b)(1)–(3).) Therefore, the Committee also determined 3 probable cause existed for it to recommend that the Commission revoke respondent’s 
“teaching credential(s) and all certification documents." 
7. Respondent requested an administrative hearing challenging the 
Committee’s recommendations. Complainant authorized a combined Accusation and 
Statement of Issues solely in her official capacity on June 22, 2023. 
8. The pleading seeks to: (1) revoke all permits and other certification 
documents the Commission issued respondent; and (2) deny her application for a 30-
day substitute teaching permit. The gravamen of the pleading is respondent’s 
involvement in domestic violence on April 4, 2020. 
April 4, 2020 Incident 
9. Numerous officers from the Tulare Police Department responded to a 
residence for a report of a fall victim who was bleeding on April 4, 2020. The first 
officer to arrive entered the home and found respondent attending to a man lying on 
the ground and bleeding profusely from the chest. The officer asked respondent what 
had happened, and she said she did not know. 
10. Another officer arrived at about the same time as an ambulance. He 
found the victim on the ground immediately inside the front door to the home. 
Respondent was kneeling next to him holding his arms. The victim’s T-shirt had a large 
amount of blood near the upper chest area. The ambulance crew lifted the T-shirt and 
revealed at least one puncture wound to the upper left chest area that was bleeding 
profusely. The victim refused to explain what had happened.
11. Due to the severity of the victim’s injury, he was immediately loaded into 
the ambulance and transported to the hospital. An officer followed the ambulance to 4 the hospital. After triage, hospital personnel told the officer the victim had sustained 
two stab wounds: one on the left side of the chest directly above his heart, and 
another on the right side of his chest near his sternum. The wounds were severe and 
life threatening. The victim was taken into surgery. Before that, the officer repeatedly 
asked the victim how he was stabbed. The victim ignored the officer’s inquiries.
12. After the victim was loaded into the ambulance and driven to the 
hospital, an officer interviewed respondent outside the home. Respondent explained 
she lived at the home with her 11-year-old son. He was not home because she had 
brought him to his father’s earlier that afternoon to spend the night. No one else lived 
in the home. Respondent identified the victim as her boyfriend, and explained he 
sometimes stayed with her. 
13. Respondent told the officer she left her home earlier that afternoon to 
go to the hair salon. The victim stayed at respondent’s home while she was gone. 
Initially, she said “Petra and them” were also in the home when she left. She later 
changed her story and said the victim was home alone. Respondent explained she was 
not home when the victim was injured, and he did not tell her what had happened 
when she returned. 
14. Officers obtained a search warrant for respondent’s home. A search of a 
trashcan in the kitchen revealed a glass pipe with a bulb on one end. There was white 
residue and burnt residue in the bulb. The pipe resembled one commonly used for 
smoking methamphetamine, and the residue was consistent with the aftermath of 
smoking methamphetamine. A further search revealed a bloody knife wrapped in a 
washcloth. 5 15. Respondent was arrested and brought to the police station for further 
questioning. During questioning by detectives, respondent reiterated that only she 
and her son lived in her home. However, the victim visited almost daily, and he stayed 
overnight frequently the previous month. Respondent and the victim partied together 
by drinking alcohol and sometimes using methamphetamine. They would do a “couple 
of hits here and there.” When asked if they used methamphetamine daily, respondent 
refused to discuss the issue any further.
16. Respondent described the day of the incident as a good day and 
explained the victim had spent the night. They went to bed early the night before. She 
described being in a dating relationship with the victim for the last few weeks. She said 
they got along well, and he treated her okay. However, they had misunderstandings as 
any couple does. 
17. Respondent said she scheduled an appointment at a hair salon in Visalia, 
but she could not recall its name or the street on which it was located. Her 
appointment was with an unknown woman. Respondent did not know what time she 
returned home, but she found the door open when she arrived. She walked inside, and 
“everything was happening.” When detectives asked for clarification of what she 
meant, respondent did not elaborate. 
18. A detective returned to the hospital the day after the incident to 
interview the victim. After the detective identified himself and explained the purpose 
of his visit, the victim told him there was nothing to investigate and nothing had 
happened. He did not cooperate when the detective took photographs of his injuries, 
and instead attempted to cover his face with a pillow.6 19. The detective used a ruse to try to get the victim to talk and said 
respondent told him what had happened and said the victim beat her. The victim 
responded that he never touched respondent but did not elaborate. After the 
detective told the victim someone had gone to jail, the victim stated he hoped it was 
not respondent. 
20. The detective explained he needed to know the truth to make sure the 
correct person was in jail. The victim finally explained he and respondent had an 
argument because respondent kicked him in the buttocks while they were in bed the 
night before. He got mad and told her to stop. Respondent got out of bed, stood up, 
and told the victim to “get the fuck out of here.” The victim got out of bed and stood 
up, and respondent stabbed him once with a knife. 
21. Respondent backed up after stabbing the victim. The victim chased
respondent out of the bedroom, and she ran outside to her car. The victim stopped at 
the front door, where the police found him, before losing consciousness. Respondent 
never told anyone with the Tulare Police Department that she stabbed the victim in 
self-defense.
Criminal Conviction
22. Criminal charges were filed against respondent for the April 4, 2020
stabbing. On August 24, 2021, in the Tulare County Superior Court, Case Number 
PCF395256, respondent pled no contest to, and was convicted of, a felony violation of 
Penal Code section 273.5, subdivision (a), corporal injury to a spouse, cohabitant, or 
child’s parent. Respondent was denied formal probation and sentenced to state prison 
for four years, with credit for 1,076 days for days spent in custody awaiting sentence, 7 good conduct credit, and work time credit. She was ordered to pay restitution, fines, 
assessments, and fees. 
Respondent’s Evidence 
23. Respondent did not produce documents or call witnesses at hearing. She 
testified on her own behalf. 
24. Respondent was raised in a “rough area” of Tulare, California. She 
graduated from Tech Prep High School in 2000. She earned a Bachelor of Arts in liberal 
studies from Fresno Pacific University in 2015. She completed Fresno Pacific 
University’s teacher credentialing program four years later. 
25. Respondent has worked as a youth development coach for the Boys and 
Girls Club in Farmersville, California, since April 2023. She is responsible for 
implementing programs and building rapport with the children served. She said her 
employer is aware of her felony conviction because she disclosed it during her 
interview and her employer ran a criminal background check during the hiring process. 
26. Respondent is interested in returning to school to earn a master’s degree 
in special education with the goal of becoming a special education teacher. She 
believes her difficult childhood would make her a good role model for students 
because she would be able to relate to them. Respondent estimated she last worked in 
a classroom as a substitute teacher in March 2020. 
27. Respondent initially explained that the victim came to her home on the 
day of the incident looking for a place to sleep. She told him she was about to leave 
for an appointment and he could stay while she was gone, but he had to leave when 8 she returned because she did not want people around her anymore. When respondent 
returned later that afternoon, she tried to get the victim to leave, but he would not. 
28. During questioning, respondent said she asked the victim to help her 
unlock her son’s bedroom door so she could retrieve her son’s laptop. She then 
explained she was trying to wake the victim to ask him for help and tell him he needed 
to leave. He became upset, got out of bed, and pinned her against the bedroom door. 
She tried calling for help from her cousin who was in another part of the house, but 
she could not speak because of the way the victim was holding her. 
29. Respondent described being unable to breathe while pinned against the 
door. She thought she was going to die. She remembered she had a knife she used to 
try to open her son’s bedroom door in her back pocket. She pulled out the knife to try 
to scare the victim into releasing her. Instead of releasing respondent, the victim “just 
went crazy” and “flipped out.” Respondent claimed she stabbed the victim in self-
defense. He released her, she ran away, and he chased after her. 
30. Respondent was arrested on the day of the incident and remained 
incarcerated until she completed her state prison sentence in April 2022. She was 
initially told she could be released from prison on parole for up to three years, but she 
ultimately served only one year. 
31. Respondent conceded at hearing that she never told the police she 
stabbed the victim in self-defense. She initially said she was not sure why she did not 
tell them. She then said she was confused when police were questioning her. Later, she 
explained she did not know if her words would be twisted and used against her. 
32. Respondent also said she lost memory of the incident while talking to the 
police. She did not regain her memory until a few weeks prior to hearing. She insisted 9 she acted in self-defense because the victim was “physically attacking” her.
Respondent explained she pled no contest to domestic violence because she missed 
her son and he had a medical issue. She did not specify the medical issue or whether it 
resolved. 
33. Respondent explained she just wants to move forward with her life. She 
has worked hard to change her life by attending therapy and going to church. She 
takes medication for memory, posttraumatic stress disorder, depression, and anxiety. 
She initially started taking medication when released from prison. Respondent’s 
testimony was not clear as to whether she has been on medication continuously or if 
she started, stopped, and then restarted. She said she “recently” has been taking 
medication “daily.” 
34. Respondent’s testimony about therapy was also difficult to understand. 
She estimated she began therapy in 2010 and continued “off and on.” But she also 
said she attended regular appointments. She then stated she has not had regular 
appointments for two months. 
35. Respondent has visited her psychiatrist monthly since being released 
from prison. The visits usually last no more than 30 minutes and are for medication 
management. She sometimes engages in talk therapy.
36. Respondent also participates in “case management” services, which 
consist of one-on-one meetings with a social worker. She said she started when 
released from prison and she does not attend often. She then explained she began 
attending monthly in approximately September 2023. 10 Analysis
DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
37. Respondent willfully inflicted severe, life-threatening injuries to the victim 
when she stabbed him twice in the chest in April 2020. Her conduct constituted 
domestic violence. (See (9 Cir. 2010) 611 Fed.3d 1080, 1083–
1085 [the conduct prohibited by Pen. Code, § 273.5 constitutes domestic violence].)
Her conduct involved moral turpitude. ( (2015) 243 Cal.App.4th 129, 
136 [”violation of [Penal Code] section 273.5 is a crime of moral turpitude as a matter 
of law”].)
38. Respondent’s claim that she stabbed the victim in self-defense was not 
credible. She admitted otherwise when she pled no contest to a felony violation of 
Penal Code section 273.5. (Pen. Code, § 1016, subd. (3) [”The legal effect of [a plea of 
nolo contendere] . . . shall be the same as that of a plea of guilty for all purposes”]; 
(1991) 235 Cal.App.3d 872, 881–882 [a guilty plea 
“constitutes an admission of every element of the offense charged”].) Respondent
cannot collaterally attack her conviction. ( (1980) 28 Cal.3d 440, 449 
[evidence of a licensee’s criminal conviction is “conclusive evidence of [her] guilt of the 
offense charged” which cannot be impeached in subsequent administrative 
proceedings].) 
39. Additionally, respondent repeatedly told criminal investigators she did 
not know how the victim was stabbed. She did not assert she stabbed him in self-
defense until after she was convicted. At hearing, she provided inconsistent 
explanations for not doing so earlier. 11 UNLAWFUL USE OF METHAMPHETAMINE
40. Health and Safety Code section 11550, subdivision (a), prohibits the use 
of certain controlled substances without a valid prescription. Methamphetamine is one 
such controlled substance. (Health & Saf. Code, § 11055, subd. (d)(2).) The person 
using the prohibited substance has the burden of proving she has a valid prescription. 
(Health & Saf. Code, § 11550, subd. (a).) Simple possession of methamphetamine does 
not involve moral turpitude. ( (1985) 171 Cal.App.3d 843, 848–849 
[simple possession of a controlled substance, as opposed to possession with the intent 
to sell, does not involve moral turpitude].) 
41. Respondent unlawfully used methamphetamine. She admitted to 
investigators that she and the victim sometimes partied together by using 
methamphetamine. She explained they would take a “couple of hits here and there.” A 
search of her home revealed a glass pipe with methamphetamine residue in the 
bulbous end. Respondent produced no evidence of a valid prescription for 
methamphetamine. 
FITNESS TO TEACH 
42. The Commission may take adverse action against a credential only when 
the underlying conduct demonstrates an unfitness to teach. (See 
(2010) 184 Cal.App.4th 462, 473.) “A teacher whose 
credential is being investigated for possible adverse action is per se unfit to teach only 
when the teacher has been convicted of a crime which the Legislature has declared 
requires the imposition of automatic sanctions on that teacher’s credentials. 
[Citations.] In all other circumstances, fitness to teach is a question of ultimate fact. 
[Citations.]” ( ., at p. 475.) 12 43. The California Supreme Court has delineated factors for determining 
whether conduct demonstrates an unfitness to teach. (See 
(1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 229-230 [analyzing former Ed. Code, § 13202, 
predecessor to Ed. Code, § 44421].) The Commission adopted the factors by 
enacting California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80302. “Only the pertinent 
 factors need to be analyzed.” (
, , 184 Cal.App.4th at p. 476.)
Adverse Effect on Others
44. Students are impressionable, and many try to emulate their teachers. 
Therefore, it is essential that an educator’s behavior be beyond reproach, and she be 
capable of exercising sound judgment. Respondent engaged in dangerous and violent 
behavior when she stabbed the victim in the chest twice. She exercised poor judgment 
when she illegally used methamphetamine. Her behavior and conduct were 
inconsistent with that of a good role model and not the type society wants students to 
emulate. Additionally, respondent’s actions had the potential of portraying other 
teachers and members of the educational community in a negative light. 
Lapse of Time 
45. Nearly four years have elapsed since respondent stabbed the victim. 
However, she was released from prison less than two years ago, and she completed 
parole more recently than that.
Aggravating or Mitigating Factors 
46. An aggravating factor is one that demonstrates greater discipline is 
necessary to adequately protect the public, students, or the teaching profession. (Cal. 13 Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80300, subd. (b).) Relevant criteria include: (1) multiple acts of 
wrongdoing or a pattern of misconduct; (2) harm to one of respondent’s students or 
the educational system; and (3) an indifference to the consequences of the 
misconduct. ( ., subd. (b)(2), (4), (5).)
47. Although there was no evidence of the specific number of times 
respondent unlawfully used methamphetamine, she did so at least once. Additionally, 
she stabbed the victim twice in the chest. Therefore, respondent engaged in multiple 
acts of wrongdoing. However, there was insufficient evidence to establish a pattern of 
misconduct.
48. Contrary to complainant’s argument, there was no evidence respondent’s 
misconduct harmed her son. He was not home when the victim was stabbed, and there 
was no evidence he ever witnessed his mother using methamphetamine. 
49. Respondent demonstrated an indifference to stabbing the victim. She 
was dishonest with investigators when she stated she did not know how the victim was 
stabbed, and she later claimed she stabbed him in self-defense. Respondent 
demonstrated a complete lack of insight into her criminal conduct.
50. A mitigating factor is one that demonstrates lesser discipline is necessary 
to adequately protect the public, students, or the teaching profession. (Cal. Code 
Regs., tit. 5, § 80300, subd. (m).) Relevant criteria include: (1) an absence of misconduct 
over an extended period of service; (2) a lack of harm to the victim; (3) evidence that 
emotional difficulties contributed to respondent’s misconduct provided she 
demonstrates by clear and convincing evidence that she has overcome such 
difficulties; (4) evidence of good character provided by witnesses familiar with the 
nature of respondent’s misconduct; (5) acknowledgment of wrongdoing; (6) lapse of 14 time relative to the seriousness of the misconduct; and (7) evidence of rehabilitation. 
(., subd. (m)(1)–(7).) 
51. Respondent presented insufficient evidence of mitigating factors. As 
previously discussed, she did not introduce any documents or call any witnesses. 
Although she testified, much of her testimony was disjointed, convoluted, and difficult 
to follow. She was allowed to testify in narrative form and frequently switched topics 
without providing the context necessary to understand what she was saying. On cross-
examination, respondent repeatedly faced difficulty focusing on the question asked, 
often digressing to unrelated topics without answering the question asked.
Respondent was not a credible witness.  
52. Respondent testified to struggling with mental illness, but she did not 
demonstrate that her struggles led to her misconduct. Furthermore, she did not 
establish “through clear and convincing evidence that . . . she no longer has such 
difficulties.” (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80300, subd. (m)(3).) Most significantly, 
respondent failed to acknowledge any wrongdoing. (
(1989) 49 Cal.3d 933, 940 [“Fully acknowledging the wrongfulness 
of [her] actions is an essential step towards rehabilitation”].)
Likelihood of Recurrence 
53. Respondent’s lack of insight into the impropriety of stabbing the victim 
twice evidences a strong likelihood of recurrence. 15 LEGAL CONCLUSIONS
Applicable Burden/Standard of Proof 
ACCUSATION
1. Complainant has the burden of proving the grounds for discipline 
alleged in the Accusation by clear and convincing evidence to a reasonable certainty. 
( (1983) 33 Cal.3d 532, 536 [an administrative agency 
seeking to discipline a license has the burden of proving the grounds for discipline 
alleged in the accusation]; see (1985) 164 
Cal.App.3d 1036, 1039-1040 [recognizing that the clear and convincing evidence 
standard applies to disciplining a teaching credential].) “The courts have defined clear 
and convincing evidence as evidence which is so clear as to leave no substantial doubt 
and as sufficiently strong to command the unhesitating assent of every reasonable 
mind [citations]. It has been said that a preponderance calls for probability, while clear 
and convincing proof demands a [citations].” ( (1978) 83 
Cal.App.3d 890, 899; italics original.) 
STATEMENT OF ISSUES
2. Respondent has the burden of proving she qualifies for a 30-Day 
Substitute Teaching Permit by a preponderance of the evidence. (
 (2006) 139 Cal.App.4th 471, 476 [the party against 
whom a statement of issues is filed bears the burden of proof regarding the issues 
raised in the pleading]; see Evid. Code, § 115 [”Except as otherwise provided by law, 
the burden of proof requires proof by a preponderance of the evidence”].) This 
evidentiary standard requires respondent to produce evidence of such weight that, 16 when balanced against evidence to the contrary, is more persuasive. (
(2009) 171 Cal.App.4th 1549, 1567.) In other words, 
respondent needs to prove it is more likely than not that she qualifies for a permit. 
( (1984) 160 Cal.App.3d 314, 320.)
Applicable Law
3. The California Supreme Court has recognized that the terms “immoral 
conduct” and “unprofessional conduct” substantially overlap one another and that 
conduct which constitutes one often includes the other. (See 
(1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 221, fn. 9.) “Unprofessional conduct” includes “’that 
which violates the rules or ethical code of a profession or such conduct which is 
unbecoming a member of a profession in good standing.’” (
 (1953) 41 Cal.2d 546, 553; quoting 66 Corpus Juris, p. 55.) 
In describing what constitutes “immoral conduct” within the context of the Education 
Code, the court in 
(1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, said: 
In , 36 Cal.2d 734, at page 
740 [227 P.2d 449], the Supreme Court quotes with 
approval the following statement from Words and Phrases, 
permanent edition, volume 20, pages 159-160: “The term 
‘immoral’ has been defined generally as that which is hostile 
to the welfare of the general public and contrary to good 
morals. Immorality has not been confined to sexual matters, 
but includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or 
indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; 
or as willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral 17 indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the 
community, and as an inconsiderate attitude toward good 
order and the public welfare.” 
( , , 179 
Cal.App.2d at p. 811.) 
4. The court in 
(2011) 194 Cal.App.4th 1454, said the following about the 
definition of immoral or unprofessional conduct:
Moreover, the definition of immoral or unprofessional 
conduct must be considered in conjunction with the unique 
position of public school teachers, upon whom are imposed 
“responsibilities and limitations on freedom of action which 
do not exist in regard to other callings.” [Citation.] 
( , , at p. 1466.)
5. And while “conduct constituting ‘evident unfitness for service’ will often 
constitute ‘unprofessional conduct[,]’ . . . the converse is not true.” (
(1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1445.) 
“’Evident unfitness for service’ requires that unfitness for service be attributable to a 
defect in temperament — a requirement not necessary for a finding of ‘unprofessional 
conduct.’” ( .) 
6. The following has been said about the analysis for determining whether 
conduct constitutes sufficient cause for taking adverse action against a credential: 18 , 66 Cal.App. 157, 168 [225 
P. 783], quoted in , 41 Cal.2d 
546, 553-554 [261 P.2d 261], found that the standards for 
judging the propriety of a teacher’s conduct, and the extent 
to which that conduct may be the basis for the revocation 
of a credential, involves many aspects. “. . . the teacher is 
entrusted with the custody of children and their high 
preparation for useful life. His habits, his speech, his good 
name, his cleanliness, the wisdom and propriety of his 
unofficial utterances, his associations, all are involved. His 
ability to inspire children and to govern them, his power as 
a teacher, and the character for which he stands are matters 
of major concern in a teacher’s selection and retention.” 
(  (1972) 22 Cal.App.3d 988, 991.) 
Conclusion 
7. The Commission may discipline a credential “for immoral or 
unprofessional conduct, . . . or for any cause that would have warranted the denial of 
an application for a credential or the renewal thereof, or for evident unfitness for 
service.” (Ed. Code, § 44421.) The Commission may deny an application for a credential 
submitted by one who “has committed any act involving moral turpitude.” (Ed. Code, § 
44345, subd. (e).) 
CAUSE FOR DISCIPLINE – UNPROFESSIONAL CONDUCT
8. Respondent engaged in unprofessional conduct when she stabbed the 
victim twice in the chest and unlawfully used methamphetamine. Such misconduct 19 demonstrated an unfitness to teach for the reasons discussed in Factual Findings 42 
through 52. Therefore, cause exists to discipline respondent’s child development 
assistant permit, child development teacher permit, child development site supervisor 
permit, and 30-day substitute teaching permit pursuant to Education Code section 
44421. 
CAUSE FOR DISCIPLINE – IMMORAL CONDUCT
9. Respondent engaged in immoral conduct when she stabbed the victim 
twice in the chest and unlawfully used methamphetamine. Such misconduct 
demonstrated an unfitness to teach for the reasons discussed in Factual Findings 42 
through 52. Therefore, cause exists to discipline respondent’s child development 
assistant permit, child development teacher permit, child development site supervisor 
permit, and 30-day substitute teaching permit pursuant to Education Code section 
44421. 
CAUSE FOR DISCIPLINE – EVIDENT UNFITNESS FOR SERVICE 
10. Respondent demonstrated evident unfitness for service when she 
stabbed the victim twice in the chest and unlawfully used methamphetamine. Such 
misconduct demonstrated an unfitness to teach for the reasons discussed in Factual 
Findings 42 through 52. Therefore, cause exists to discipline respondent’s child 
development assistant permit, child development teacher permit, child development 
site supervisor permit, and 30-day substitute teaching permit pursuant to Education 
Code section 44421. 20 CAUSE FOR DISCIPLINE –ACTS INVOLVING MORAL TURPITUDE
11. Respondent committed an act involving moral turpitude when she 
stabbed the victim twice in the chest. Such misconduct demonstrated an unfitness to 
teach for the reasons discussed in Factual Findings 42 through 52. Therefore, cause 
exists to discipline respondent’s child development assistant permit, child 
development teacher permit, child development site supervisor permit, and 30-day 
substitute teaching permit pursuant to Education Code section 44421, as that statute 
relates to Education Code section 44345, subdivision (e), based on her stabbing the 
victim. 
12. Respondent’s unlawful use of methamphetamine did not constitute an 
act involving moral turpitude. Therefore, no cause exists to discipline her child 
development assistant permit, child development teacher permit, child development 
site supervisor permit, or 30-day substitute teaching permit pursuant to Education 
Code section 44421, as that statute relates to Education Code section 44345, 
subdivision (e), based on her unlawful use of methamphetamine. 
CAUSE FOR DENIAL – ACTS INVOLVING MORAL TURPITUDE  
13. Respondent committed an act involving moral turpitude when she 
stabbed the victim twice in the chest. Such misconduct demonstrated an unfitness to 
teach for the reasons discussed in Factual Findings 42 through 52. Therefore, cause 
exists to deny respondent’s application for a 30-day substitute teaching permit 
pursuant to Education Code section 44345, subdivision (e), based on her stabbing the 
victim.
14. Respondent’s unlawful use of methamphetamine did not constitute an 
act involving moral turpitude. Therefore, no cause exists to deny her application for a 21 30-day substitute teaching permit pursuant to Education Code section 44345, 
subdivision (e), based on her unlawful use of methamphetamine. 
APPROPRIATE DISCIPLINE
15. Respondent did not produce sufficient evidence of her continued fitness 
to perform the duties authorized by her child development assistant permit, child 
development teacher permit, child development site supervisor permit, or 30-day 
substitute teaching permit. Nor did she provide any assurances of her ability to 
perform the duties authorized by a 30-day substitute teaching permit in a manner 
consistent with public health, safety, and welfare. Therefore, each of respondent’s 
permits should be revoked. Additionally, her application for a 30-day substitute 
teaching permit should be denied. 
ORDER 
1. The child development assistant permit issued to respondent Blanca 
Marie Quintana on December 20, 2010, is REVOKED. 
2. The child development teacher permit issued to respondent Blanca Marie 
Quintana on August 17, 2012, is REVOKED. 
3. The child development site supervisor permit issued to respondent 
Blanca Marie Quintana on February 10, 2016, is REVOKED. 
4. The 30-day substitute teaching permit issued to respondent Blanca Marie 
Quintana on October 20, 2016, is REVOKED.22 5. Respondent Blanca Marie Quintana’s application for a 30-day substitute 
teaching permit dated May 23, 2022, is DENIED. 
DATE: January 10, 2024  
COREN D. WONG 
Administrative Law Judge 
Office of Administrative Hearings
 