BEFORE THE  
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING  
STATE OF CALIFORNIA  
In the Matter of  the Accusation  Against : 
DANIEL ALVAREZ -IBARRA, Jr. , Respondent  
Agency Case No. 2 -547415735  
OAH No. 2024090573  
PROPOSED DECISION  
Matthew S. Block , Administrative Law Judge  (ALJ), Office of Administrative 
Hearings (OAH), State of California, heard this matter on April 14 and 15 , 2025 , in 
Sacramento, California . 
Adriana Z. Lazark , Deputy Attorney General, represented Mary Vixie Sandy 
(complainant), Executive Director of the California Commission on Teacher 
Credentialing (Commission).  
Matthew Chevedden, Attorney at Langenkamp, Curtis, Price, Lindstrom & 
Chevedden, represented Daniel Alvarez- Ibarra, Jr.  (respondent) who was present . 
Evidence was received , the record closed , and the matter submitted for decision 
on April 15 , 202 5. 2 FACTUAL FINDINGS  
Jurisdiction al Matters  
1. On June 9, 2023, the Commission issued respondent  a Certificate of 
Clearance (Certificate). The Certificate will expire on July 1, 2028 , unless renewed . 
2. Respondent previously held the following credentials: (1) a Clear Single 
Subject Teaching Permit, which was issued on June 26, 2018, and expired on July 1, 
2023; (2) a Preliminary Five Year Single Subject Teaching Permit, which was issued on 
January 4, 201 6, and expired on February 1, 2021; (3) an Emergency 30- Day Substitute 
Teaching Permit, which was issued on September 21, 2015, and expired on October 1, 
2016; and (4) a Certificate of Clearance, which was issued on October 11, 2013, and 
expired on November 1, 2018.  
3. On September 3, 2024, complainant’s representative sig ned and 
thereafter filed the Accusation against respondent in her official capacity. The  
Accusation allege d cause to discipline respondent’s credentials  based on  behavior  that 
complainant alleges constitutes : (1) unprofessional conduct; (2) immoral conduct; (3) 
acts of moral turpitude;  (4) evident unfitness for service; and (5) persistent violation of 
refusal to obey the laws regulating the duties of persons serving in the public school 
system.  More spec ifically, the Accu sation alleged that during the f all 2022 semester , 
respondent made multiple disparaging and sexually suggestive comments to the high 
school students in his class.  
4. As factors in aggravation, complainant alleges respondent engaged in 
multiple acts of wrongdoing demonstrating a pattern of misconduct, and that respondent’s misconduct significantly harmed a child trusted to his care, the public, or 3 the education system. Complainant contends these factors demonstrate that a greater 
degree of adverse action is appropriate . 
5. Respondent timely filed a Notice of Defense to the Accusation. The 
matter was set for evidentiary hearing before an ALJ of the OAH, an independent adjudicative agency of the State of California, pursuant to Government Code section 
11500 et seq.  
Background  
6. The Met Sacramento (the Met) is a small, public charter school within the 
Sacramento City Unified School District  (District).  In addition to attending academic 
classes, students at the Met participate in internships in their chosen field of interest. 
To assist the students in obtaining internships, target academic goals, and provide the 
students with  educational resources , students are placed into advisory  class es. 
Students stay in the same advisory class for all four years with the same students and 
the sa me teacher . Advisory class teachers work closely with students and their families 
and are considered partners with the students on their academic journey . 
7. Respondent was employed as a teacher at the Met during the f all 2022 
semester. He taught biology and ethnic studies, and he  was also assigned an advisory 
class of sophomore students . The advisory class had a different teacher during their 
freshman year, but that teacher  left the Met  to pursue other opportunities.  
Respondent’s Conduct During Fall 2022 Semester  
8. In early October, several of the students in respondent’s advisory class 
contacted the Met’s  principal with allegations that respondent made multiple 4 inappropriate comments in class . An investigation followed, during which  the students 
were asked to prepare written statements  to document what they observed in class . 
9. Student 3 drafted a written statement about respondent’s behavior and 
testified at hearing. He is presently a senior at Monterey Trail High School in Elk Grove, 
California. He attended the Met during his sophomore year and was in respondent’s 
advisory class . 
10. Student 3 believes respondent is a good academic teacher. At first, he  
found respondent to be approachable and enjoyed being in his class. However, shortly 
after th e fall 2022 semester  started, respondent began making comments that Student 
3 found inappropriate and made him uncomfortable. For instance, when Student 3 and 
his friends were talking in a small group, respondent approached them and asked, “Do 
you nut?” Student 3 interpreted respondent’s question as referring to ejaculation.  
11. On another occasion, Student 3 overheard a female student ask to leave 
class to use the restroom, and respondent refused to allow her to leave. When the girl 
explained she needed to go to the restroom  for feminine hygiene reasons , respondent 
told her she needed to tell him when she was “on [her] period.” When the student 
became frustrated and stormed out of the room, respondent told the rest of the class 
she was just mad because she was “on her period.”  
12. Student 3’s close friend , Student 7, was also in respondent’s advisory 
class. Student 7’s father passed away during his freshman year. He had difficulty processing the loss and struggled academically as a result. Student 7 drafted a written 
statement about respondent’s behavior. He and his mother testified at hearing.  
13. Student 7 is prescribed attention -deficit /hyperactivity disorder  (ADHD ) 
medication. When he was taking it in class one day, respondent commented that 5 Student 7 was “popping pills.” He also publicly offered his opinion that people act 
differently when  they take ADHD medication. Student 7 believes respondent was 
referring to him. According to Student 7, respondent also frequently referred to 
students as “bitches” and “assholes.” During the second week of school, he as ked all 
the female students in the class if they were “done with their periods” and ready to 
cooperate, as he felt they had been disagreeable the prior week due to their menstrual 
cycles.  
14. Student 5 drafted a written statement about respondent’s behavior and 
testified at hearing. She  is presently a senior at the Met. She was in respondent’s 
advisory class during her sophomore year . She remembers respondent making 
comments about students “popping pills” but does not remember if he was referring to a particular student. According to Student 5, respondent publicly compared a 
student’s  mood when taking ADHD medication to the female students’ moods  when 
they were “on their periods.”  She also recal ls respondent telling female students he 
was “letting things go” behaviorally because they were on their periods.  
15. Student 5 also testified that respondent discussed topics with students 
that made her uncomfortable. For instance, he openly discussed that he had previously 
attempted to end  his own life. According to Student 5, respondent told the students 
that having feelings of despair and suicidal ideation was just “kind of normal.” 
Although the discussion made her uncomfortable, s he does not believe respondent 
intended any harm to the students. She feels like the comments he made came across 
worse than respondent  intended.  
16. Student 6 drafted a written statement about respondent’s behavior and 
testified at hearing. She was in respondent’s advisory class during her sophomore year 
at the Met. She felt that respondent made a concerted effort to connect with students, 6 but his behavior soon became overly familiar and inappropriate. She testified that he 
made comments about a male student touching himself in the school restroom, and 
about female students “touching themselves” at home or in the school restroom. She 
also recalled two occasions where respondent spoke to female students about their 
periods.  
17. Student 8 drafted a written statement about respondent’s behavior. She 
and her mother testified at hearing. Student 8 was in respondent’s advisory class 
during her sophomore year at the Met. Prior to attending the Met, Student 8 attended 
another school where she was frequently truant and had low grades . On one occasion 
in the f all 2022 semester , respondent called her over to his desk, where he told her, 
“You fucked up at your last school, now you’re fucking up here.” He then brought up 
her poor attendance a t her previous school, and said, “It’s already dangerous out there 
for a little g irl, but then add a dick to it.” Respondent’s comments made Student 8 
uncomfortable, because she believed he was referencing her getting raped or having 
sexual intercourse with people she randomly met  on the street . Student 8’s mother 
testified she was frustrated respondent spoke  to her daughter in that fashion, as she 
already suffered from low esteem.  
18. Student 8 recalls respondent asking a male student if he “nuts,” and 
asking another mal e student if he was going to the restroom to “jerk off.” He told 
students of his mental health struggles and previous suicide attempt. He also 
professed to have once been a cocaine  dealer, and discussed the different sensations 
of being intoxicated from different types of alcohol.  According to Student 8, the 
advisory class was “not at all” productive.  
19. In other written statements, students reported respondent telling the 
class he was “not turned on” by any of them, and that they were all “horny.” A student 7 also reported that respondent had a conversation with a group of students about 
when to “pull out” during sexual intercourse. Another  student wrote that on one 
occasion, while respondent was erasing a penis that one of the students had drawn  on 
the classroom white board, he looked back at the class and asked if he could now say that he rubbed a penis. Additionally, several students reported physical contact, 
including touching a female student on the forehead and trying to trip students with 
his cane.  
Respondent’s Evidence  
20. Respondent called Leticia Moran to testify on his behalf. Ms. Moran has 
been a teacher since 2005. She is presently employed by the District as a physics 
teacher at Hiram Johnson High School  (Hiram Johnson) . 
21. Ms. Moran has known respondent for several years and they have 
become very close friends. He is the only colleague she has ever invited into her home to meet her family. She believes he is a very knowledgeable teacher and cares deeply 
about his students. S he has observed respondent teaching and interacting with 
students and described him as “casual but no nonsense.”  
22. Ms. Moran is aware of the allegations against respondent. While she 
supports him and values their frie ndship, she acknowledges the statements 
respondent made to the students in his advisory class a t the Met  were “very 
inappropriate.”  She believes respondent made the comments because he was trying to 
relate to the students, and because he tends to attempt to normalize certain topics 
that other s might consider “taboo.” According to Ms. Moran, “teachers say stupid 
things all the time,” and she admits that she has used profanity in the classroom on 
occasion. However, she has never referred to students as “bitches” or “assholes,” never 8 asked female students about their menstrual cycle, and never made comments about 
masturbation  or ejaculation in the classroom. Ms. Moran feels respondent’s behavior 
and errors in judgment are correctable. She sincerely believes respondent wants to be 
“the best version of himself.”  
23. Respondent testified at hearing. He initially went to school to become a 
psychologist. As part of his educational program, he was required to complete a predesignated number of volunteer hours . He started volunteering at the Sacramento 
County Food Bank as a tutor for individuals seeking to earn their General Educational 
Development certificate. It was then that he  decided to switch majors and become a 
teacher.  
24. Respondent started teaching at Hiram Johnson  in 2016.  The population 
was diverse and student behavior was challenging, but he loved teaching there. 
However, after the 2021/2022 academic year, Hiram Johnson eliminated biology from 
its curriculum. Respondent was notified that he would not be retained as a teacher at 
Hiram Johnson, but the District provided him with a list of available positions at other 
District schools. The only full- time position on the list was a biology teacher  position  at 
the Met, which respondent accepted. However, after he was hired, respondent was 
informed he would also be teaching an ethnic studies class and an advisory class. He 
had never taught either class, and he was unfamiliar with the advisory concept.  
25. Respondent found the culture at the M et to be very different than Hiram 
Johnson.  Students call teachers by their first names, and it is  not a traditional learning 
environment. Respondent did his best to fit in with his students. In trying to do so, he 
used language and made comments that he should not have. For instance, respondent 
admits frequently using profanity during the advisory class. At the time, he felt that 
doing so would help endear him to the students as someone they c ould relate to  and 9 connect with . In retrospect, h e understands that he needed to be “the adult in the 
room,” and that gratuitously using profanity was very unprofessional  in an educational 
setting.  
26. Respondent admits that he asked a male student, “You don’t nut?” He 
was passing out almonds  to the students and one of them said they did not want a 
snack that contained nuts. Respondent knew as soon as the words came out of his 
mouth that he had misspoken, and he told the stud ents, “you know  what I mean.”  
27. Respondent admits making comments about the female menstrual cycle. 
It started when he made a “bad joke” about premenstrual syndrome. Respondent 
knows he should never have made the comment. However, after he did, the students 
would bring the subject up all the time. He would respond in turn, which “dug [him] 
even deeper.”  
28. Respondent admits telling his advisory students that he was not 
physically turned on by any of them during the first week of school. While he and the 
students were getting to know each other, respondent shared that he is asexual. It was 
in that context that he told the students he was not turned on  by any of them. He was 
trying to be open with the students about his life and saw it as an opportunity to 
educate them about inclusivity . 
29. Respondent admits telling Student 8 that she was “fucking up [at the 
Met].” He explained he did so for “shock value” to emphasize the importance of attending class. He also admits saying, “It’s already dangerous out there for a little gi rl, 
but then add a dick to it.” He understands it would be reasonable for a person to 
interpret the comment as sexual and acknowledges Student 8 appeared “stunned” 
when he said it. According to respondent, the Met is in a poor area of downtown 10 Sacramento. He used the term  “dick” to refer to a bad person that Student 8 may 
encounter on the street if she is truant from school.  He was not referring to male 
genitalia.  
30. Respondent admits having a conversation with students about when to 
“pull out” during sexual intercourse. He overheard a conversation in which a student 
stated that “pulling out” was a suitable form of birth control. Respondent used the 
opportunity to try to educate the students , and presented them with statistics 
demonstrating that it is not.  
31. Respondent admits making a comment about touching a male penis 
when he erased the drawing on the white board. According to respondent, students in 
his classes would routinely draw “five penises per day” on the white board. His practice 
was to make the pers on who drew the picture erase it if he caught them in the act. 
When he did not catch the  person, he would erase the drawing himself.  Respondent 
was attempting to make a joke he thought the students would find funny. 
Nonetheless, he realizes that by making the joke he was validating the immature 
behavior of the student who drew the picture.  
32. Respondent admits telling a male student to go to the school restroom 
to masturbate. The student was disrupting class by acting like he was masturbating 
and banging the bottom of his desk with his fist. Respondent told him that the 
behavior was inappropria te for the classroom, and that he needed to go to the 
bathroom in private if he was unable to control his biological urges.  
33. Respondent admits openly discussing his prior attempt to end his own 
life in class . He did so after a student publicly disclosed in class that they were 
depressed and considering suicide. Respondent thought it would have been 11 dangerous to ignore  the statement . He is open about his own prior mental health 
struggles to let others know there is hope , and that asking for help is not a sign of 
weakness. He recalls that when he had the discussion with the class, the students were 
very quiet, as if they were “processing” what he shared with them . 
34. Respondent admits touching a female student on the forehead.  The 
gesture comes from Itachi, a character in a Japanese manga series called Naruto, which 
he and the student were discussing at the time. When he touched her forehead, the 
student asked, “Really, Itachi?” Respondent did not believe the student was offended 
and interp reted her response to mean that she did not like the character. However, he 
now understands how she may have felt like respondent was invading her personal 
space.  
35. Respondent understands that he never should have publicly commented 
on the menstrual cycles of his female students, and that it was unfair to publicly embarrass them. He also understands that despite good intentions, his sexualized 
comments were inappropri ately made outside of an educational context. Although he 
did not intend his comments about Student 8’s attendance to be interpreted as sexual, in retrospect he understands why they could be.  
36. Respondent resigned from the District, effective June 30, 2023, and is not 
presently teaching. Going through the Commission’s disciplinary process has been  a 
humbling experience for him. Even though he acknowledges errors in his judgment while teaching at the Met, he believes he is a good teacher, and he would like to 
return to teaching if afforded the opportunity.  12 37. Respondent submitted several letters of support, two of which were 
written by his former colleagues at Hiram Johnson. The first was written by Adriene 
Jackson, who wrote, in relevant part:  
[Respondent] and I worked together as teacher s in the 
science department at Hiram Johnson HS from 2015 to 
2022. During that time, I had the opportunity to observe his 
interactions with students and the rapport he had with them. At lunch time, [respondent’s] room was full of 
students who came there bec ause they respected him and 
were comfortable around him. Over the course of our time 
working together, I also had conversations with [respondent] about students. In those conversations, it was 
obvious how much he cared about them. Whenever I walked into his classroom during instruction time, students were engaged and on task as he circulated and helped 
them with class work.  
38. The other letter was written by Ramiro Hernandez , who wrote, in relevant 
part: 
For several years, I had the privilege of working alongside 
[respondent] at Hiram Johnson High School in Sacramento, 
California. During that time, I witnessed firsthand his 
unwavering commitment to fostering a love of science and 
learning in his students, as well as an unparalleled ability to develop supportive relationships with a culturally and 
linguistically diverse population of learners.  13 Analysis  
39. Complainant bears the burden of proving the allegations in the 
Accusation by clear and convincing evidence.  She has met her burden.  Respondent 
made multiple disparaging and inappropriate comments to students in his advisory 
class at the Met. In his testimony, respondent admitted gratuitously using profanity, 
discussing the menstrual cycles of female students, making comments about 
masturbation and ejaculation, and making comments about ADHD medication when 
he knew a student in the class was  prescribed ADHD medication . Complainant also 
established, and respondent admits, that he told Student 8 she was “fucking up” at the 
Met, and that “[i]t’s already dangerous out there for a little girl, but then add a dick to 
it.” Respondent acknowledges his behavior was completely inappropriate and 
unbecoming of an educator.  
40. In Morrison v. State Board of Education  (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, the California 
Supreme Court concluded that a teaching credential cannot be disciplined for immoral conduct, unprofessional conduct, or conduct involving moral turpitude “unless that 
conduct indicates that the [educator] is unfit to teach.” (
Id. at p. 229.) The Court 
outlined factors to consider when determining whether an educator’s conduct 
demonstrates unfitness to teach, which have been codified in California Code of 
Regulations, title 5, section 80302, subdivision (a). The factors are:  
(1) the likelihood that the conduct may have adversely 
affected students or fellow teachers, and the degree of such 
adversity anticipated;  
(2) the proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct;  14 (3) the types of credentials held or sought by the person 
involved;  
(4) any extenuating or aggravating circumstances 
surrounding the conduct;  
(5) the praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives 
resulting in the conduct;  
(6) the likelihood of recurrence of the question conduct;  
(7) the extent to which disciplinary action may have an 
adverse impact or chilling effect on the constitutional rights 
of the person involved, or other teachers ; and 
(8) the publicity or notoriety  given to the conduct.  
LIKELIHOOD OF ADVERSE EFFECTS ON STUDENTS OR OTHER TEACHERS  
41. Respondent’s conduct cause d the students in his advisory class to feel 
uncomfortable. He made disparaging comments about his female students’ behavior 
which he attributed to their menstrual cycle. He embarrassed a female student by 
refusing to allow her restroom access to tend to her  personal hygiene needs and told 
her she needed to tell him when she is “on [her] period.”  He also made comments 
about male and female students touching themselves at home and in the school restroom. Multiple students testified that they were embarrassed and offended by 
respondent’s behavior.  There is no evidence of any adverse effects on other teachers.  15 PROXIMITY OR REMOTENESS IN TIME 
42. The incident s occurred over two and a half years ago . They are  more 
remote than proximate in time.  
TYPES OF CREDENTIALS HELD OR SOUGHT  
43. Respondent presently holds a Certificate of Clearance , which verifies he 
meets the personal qualifications necessary to obtain a regular teaching or services 
credential. (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80028.) He previously held other credentials, 
including a Clear Single Subject Teaching Permit, over which the Commission retains jurisdiction. (Ed. Code, § 44440, subd. (b).)  
EXTENUATING OR AGGRAVATING CIRCUMSTANCES  
44. Neither the Education Code nor the applicable regulations specify what 
constitutes “extenuating circumstances.” However, California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80300, subdivision (m), defines “mitigating factor” as “an event or circumstance which  demonstrates that the public, school children and the profession 
would be adequately protected by a more lenient degree of adverse action or no adverse action whatsoever.”  California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80300, 
subdivision (b), lists aggr avating factors, the presence of which indicate a greater 
degree of discipline is necessary to protect students and the teaching profession. These factors include, in pertinent part: (1) a prior record of adverse action; (2) that the misconduct significant ly harmed a child, the public, or the educational system; and (3) 
the credential holder demonstrated indifference toward the consequence of the 
misconduct.  16 45. Respondent has no prior disciplinary record with the Commission. During 
the fall 2022 semester , he was struggling to adapt to a new student body in an 
unfamiliar educational environment. Respondent made some of the comments at issue 
in this case in a poor attempt to connect with his students. He admitted all the 
allegations in the Accusation and repeatedly acknowledged that he behaved poorly.  
(Seide v. Com . of Bar Examiners  (1989) 49 Cal.3d 933, 940 [“Fully acknowledging the 
wrongfulness of [one’s] actions is an essential step towards rehabilitation.”].)  
46. Nonetheless, respondent made a series of disparaging and inappropriate 
comments to a classroom of impressionable high school sophomores. His comments and questions about his female students’ menstrual cycles were intrusive and incredibly offensive. Regardless of his motives , as he candidly testified, respondent 
should have acted like “the adult in the room.”  
PRAISEWORTHINESS OR BLAMEWORTHINESS OF MOTIVES  
47. Respondent acknowledges behaving inappropriately toward the students 
in his advisory class. He testified that some of the behavior was attributable to him trying to acclimate to the Met and fit in with his students. It is difficult to see how 
referring to the female menstrual cycle, or discussing a student’s ADHD medication , 
would enable him to do so. However, he credibly testified that his intention in making some comments was to educate or maintain  decorum in the classroom.  Notably, while 
several of respo ndent’s comments were sexual in nature, they do not appear to have 
been motivated by any deviant interest in a sexual relationship with any of his 
students.  17 LIKELIHOOD OF RECURRENCE  
48. Respondent resigned from the Met and is presently not teaching. He no 
longer has any contact with any of the students from the advisory class. He also 
testified that going through the Commission’s disciplinary process has been a 
humbling and eye -opening experience. He feels he is now better equipped to establish 
and maintain boundaries in the classroom. He taught at Hiram Johnson for years 
without any disciplinary issues with the Commission. The behavior occurred while 
respondent was struggling to adapt his  teaching style to the culture at the Met, and 
appears to have been caused, at least in part, by the difficulties he experienced in an 
unfamiliar educational environment. W hen all the evidence is considered, respondent’s 
behavior appears unlikely to recur.  
CHILLING EFFECT  
49. There is no evidence that disciplin ing respondent’s Certificate  would 
adversely impact or chill respondent or any other teacher in the free exercise of their constitutional rights.  
PUBLICITY OR NOTORIETY GIVEN TO CONDUCT  
50. No evidence was presented that the conduct at issue was either 
publicized or notorious.  
Conclusion  
51. Complainant proved each of the allegations by clear and convincing 
evidence. Respondent engaged in immoral  and unprofessional conduct  involving 
moral turpitude . He persistently defied and refused to obey the laws regulating the 
duties of a teacher, and his behavior demonstrates his evident unfitness for service. 18 When all the evidence is considered in light of the Morrison  factors, complainant 
established respondent’s  unfit ness to teach.  However, in light of the mitigating 
evidence addressed in Factual Findings 45, 47, and 48, outright revocation of his 
Certificate and other credentials is not warranted. Suspending his  Certificate and other 
credentials for two years is sufficient to protect children, the public, and the teaching 
profession.  
LEGAL CONCLUSIONS  
Burden and Standard of Proof  
1. Complainant bears the burden of proving the allegations in the  
Accusation by clear and convincing evidence to a reasonable certainty. ( Gardner v. 
Commission on Professional Competence  (1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035.)  Clear and 
convincing evidence requires proof that is so clear as to leave no substantial doubt 
and that is sufficiently strong to command the unhesitating assent of every reasonable 
mind. ( In re Marriage of Brook s & Robinson  (2008) 169 Cal.App.4th 176, 190.)  
Applicable Law  
2. Pursuant to the Education Code, commencing with section 44000, and 
California Code of Regulations, title 5, commencing with section 80000, the 
Commission is responsible for credentialing teachers in public schools in California, 
including issuing credentia ls and taking adverse action against applicants and 
credential holders.  
3. Education Code section 44345 provides in part:  19 The Commission may deny any application for the issuance 
of a credential or for the re newal  of a credential made by an 
applicant who falls under any of the following categories:  
[¶] . . . [¶] 
(e) Has committed any act involving moral turpitude.  
Any denial pursuant to subdivisions (a) to (e), inclusive, shall be based upon reasons related to the applicant’s fitness to teach or fitness to perform other duties which the 
credential would authorize the applicant to perform.  
4. Moral turpitude has been described as “any crime or misconduct 
committed without excuse, or ‘any dishonest or immoral’ act not necessarily a crime.” 
(
Clerici v. Dept . of Motor Vehicles  (1990) 224 Cal.App.3d 1016, 1017.)  
5. Education Code section 44421 provides, in part:  
The Commission on Teacher Credentialing shall privately 
admonish, publicly reprove, revoke, or suspend for immoral 
or unprofessional conduct, or for persistent defiance of, and 
refusal to obey, the laws regulating the duties of persons serving in the publi c school system, or for any cause that 
would have warranted the denial of an application for a credential or the renewal thereof, or for evident unfitness for service.  
6. Education Code section 44440, subdivision (b), provides:  20 The suspension or expiration of any credential, its surrender 
without the written consent of the commission, or a 
revocation pursuant to Section 44423 does not deprive the 
commission of its authority to do the following:  
(1) Institute or continue  a disciplinary proceeding against 
the credential holder upon any ground provided by law.  
(2) Enter an order  suspending or revoking the credential.  
(3) Issue a public  reproval or private admonition to the 
credential holder.  
California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80300, states 
in part:  
[¶] . . . [¶] 
(b) “Aggravating factor ” is an event or circumstance which 
demonstrates that a greater degree of adverse action for an act of professional misconduct is needed to adequately 
protect the public, schoolchildren or the profession. 
Aggravating factors may include, but are not limite d to, the 
following:  
[¶] . . . [¶]  
(2) that the  misconduct evidences multiple acts of 
wrongdoing or demonstrates a pattern of misconduct;  
[¶] . . . [¶]  21 (4) that the misconduct significantly harmed a child 
entrusted to the care of a credential holder or applicant, 
significantly harmed the public or the educational system;  
7. As set forth in Factual Finding 34 , California Code of Regulations, title 5, 
section 80302, subdivision (a), sets forth the factors to consider “to determine the 
relationship between the alleged misconduct and the applicant’s or holder’s fitness, 
competence, or ability to effectively perfo rm the duties authorized by the credential.”  
8. The California Supreme Court has recognized that the terms “immoral 
conduct” and “ unprofessional  conduct” substantially  overlap one another and conduct 
that constitutes one often includes the other. ( Morrison v. State Bd. of Ed. , supra , 1 
Cal.3d at p. 221, fn. 9.) Additionally, in San Diego Unified School District v. Commission 
on Professional Competence  (2011) 194 Cal.App.4th 1454, the court explained:  
Moreover, the definition of immoral or unprofessional conduct must be considered in conjunction with the unique position of public school teachers, upon whom are imposed 
“responsibilities and limitations on freedom of action which 
do not exist in regard to  other callings.” [Citation.]  
(
Id., at p. 1466.)  
9. Immoral conduct is sometime considered as synonymous with 
“dishonesty” or a high degree of unfairness. ( Bd. of Ed . of the San Francisco Unified 
School Dist . v. Weiland  (1960) 179 Cal.App. 2d 808, 811.) The court explained in Palo 
Verde Unified School District of Riverside v. Hensey  (190) 9 Cal.App.3d 967, 972:  22 The term “immoral” has been defined as that which is 
hostile to the welfare of the general public and contrary to 
good morals. Immorality includes conduct inconsistent with 
rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, 
dissoluteness; or as willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct 
showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable 
members of the community, and as an inconsiderate 
attitude toward good order and the public welfare.  
10. “Evident unfitness for service” means a teacher is clearly not fit, not 
adapted to or unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of temperamental defects 
or inadequacies. ( Woodland v. Joint Unified School District v. Commission on 
Professional Competence  (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444.) “Unlike ‘unprofessional 
conduct,’ ‘evident unfitness for service’ connotes a fixed character trait, presumably 
not remediable merely on receipt of notice that one’s conduct fails to meet the 
expectations of the employing  school district.” ( Id. at p. 1445 .) 
Cause s for Discipline  
11. Based on the Factual Findings and Legal Conclusions as a whole, 
complainant established by clear and convincing evidence that respondent committed 
acts constituting unprofessional conduct in or around October 2022 . Consequently, 
cause exists to discipline his C ertificate  pursuant to  Education Code section 44421.  
12. Based on the Factual Findings and Legal Conclusions as a whole, 
complainant established by clear and convincing evidence that respondent committed acts of immoral conduct in or around October 2022.  Consequently, cause exists to 
discipline respondent’s Certificate  pursuant to Education Code section 44421 . 23 13. Based on the Factual Findings and Legal Conclusions as a whole, 
complainant established by clear and convincing evidence that respondent committed 
acts of moral turpitude in or around October 2022.  Consequently, cause exists to 
discipline respondent’s C ertificate  pursuant to  Education Code section 44435, 
subdivision (e).  
14. Based on the Factual Findings and Legal Conclusions as a whole, 
complainant established by clear and convincing evidence that respondent committed 
acts demonstrating his eviden t unfitness  for service in or around October 2022.  
Consequently, cause exists to discipline respondent’s Certificate  pursuant to Education 
Code section 44421.  
15. Based on the Factual Findings and Legal Conclusions as a whole, 
complainant established by clear and convincing evidence that respondent persistently 
defied and refused to obey the laws regulating the duties of a teacher.  Consequently, 
cause exists to discipline respondent’s C ertificate  pursuant  to Education Code section 
44421.  
Aggravating Factors  
16. Based on the Factual Findings as a whole, complainant established by 
clear and convincing evidence that respondent’s conduct evidences multiple acts of 
wrongdoing and demonstrates a pattern of misconduct , which is an aggravating 
factor. (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80300, subd. (b)(2).) Complainant also established by 
clear and convincing evidence that respondent’s conduct significantly harmed children 
entrusted to his care, which is another aggravating factor. ( Id., at subd. (b)(4).)  24 Appropriate Discipline  
17. Pursuant to Education Code section 44421, the Commission shall 
privately admonish or publicly reprove a credential holder, or revoke or suspend his 
credential, if the credential holder has engaged in immoral or unprofessional conduct, 
action that warrants denial of an application for a credential or the renewal thereof, or 
is evidently unfit for service.  The purpose of licensing proceedings is not punishment, 
but to protect the public. ( Fahmy v. Medical Bd . of California  (1995) 38 Cal.App.4th 
810, 817.)  
18. Careful consideration has been given to the available disciplinary options. 
Respondent’s behavior at the Met was unacceptable. However, he has no prior record 
of discipline with the Commission, and he admitted that when he made the comments, 
he was struggling to professionally acclimate to an unfamiliar educational 
environment. Even some of the students testified that he was a good teacher and 
simply tried too hard to get along with the class. When all  the evidence is considered , 
outright revocation of respondent’s Certificate would be unduly punitive. However, discipline is warran ted, and suspen ding respondent’s Certificate and other credentials 
for two years is appropriate to protect children, the public, and the teaching 
profession.  
// 
// 25 ORDER  
The certificate s and permits i ssued to responden t Daniel Alvarez- Ibarra , Jr. by 
the California Commission on Teacher Credentialing are  hereby SUSPENDED for two  
years.
DATE:  May 14, 2025  
MATTHEW S. BLOCK  
Administrative Law Judge  
Office of Administrative Hearings  
 
