BEFORE THE  
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING  
STATE OF CALIFORNIA  
In the Matter of  the Accusation  Against : 
JACQUELINE KHAMSY PALAFOX , aka JACQUELINE KHAMSY 
BOUNPONECHANNITA, Respondent  
Agency Case No. 2 -508236385  
OAH No. 2024070877  
PROPOSED DECISION  
Matthew S. Block , Administrative Law Judge  (ALJ), Office of Administrative 
Hearings (OAH), State of California, heard this matter on February 10 through 12, 2025 , 
by videoconference from Sacramento, California . 
Seth A. Curtis , Deputy Attorney General, represented Mary Vixie Sandy 
(complainant), Executive Director of the California Commission on Teacher 
Credentialing (Commission).  
Emily Power , Attorney at Langenkamp, Curtis, Price, Lindstrom & Chevedden, 
represented Jacqueline Khamsy Palafox, also known as (aka) Jacqueline Khamsy 
Bounponechannita  (respondent) , who was present . 
Evidence was received , the record closed , and the matter submitted for decision 
on February 12, 2025 . 2 FACTUAL FINDINGS  
Jurisdiction al Matters  
1. On May 17, 1996, the Commission issued respondent an Emergency 30-
Day Substitute Teaching Permit, which expired on June 1, 1997. On July 9, 1996, the 
Commission issued respondent an Emergency Long Term Single Subject Teaching 
Permit, which expired on July 1, 1999.  
2. On July 16, 1999, the Commission issued respondent a Clear Multiple 
Subject Teaching Credential (credential). The credential expired on August 1, 2024, and 
has not been renewed.  
3. On May 22, 2024 , the Board’s former Deputy Director signed and 
thereafter filed the Accusation on complainant’s behalf. The Accusation alleges cause to discipline respondent’s credential for: (1) unprofessional conduct; (2) evident 
unfitness for service; (3) moral turpitude; and (4) immoral conduct. More specifically, 
the Accusation alleges that resp ondent brough t methylenedioxymethamphetamine  
(MDMA)  into her classroom  and left it unattended in a drawer. As an aggravating 
factor, the Accusation also alleges  respondent’s conduct was surrounded by bad faith, 
dishonesty, or violation of the law governing educators.  
4. Respondent timely filed a Notice of Defense to the Accusation. The 
matter was set for evidentiary hearing before an ALJ of the OAH, an independent 
adjudicative agency of the State of California, pursuant to Government Code section 
11500 et seq.  3 Complainant’s Evidence  
5. At all relevant times, respondent was employed by the Tracy Unified 
School District (TUSD) as a teacher at Kimball High School (Kimball) in Tracy, California. 
William Masly ar has been the principal at Kim ball since f all 2022 and testified  at 
hearing.  
6. On October 5, 2022, a teacher approached Mr. Maslyar and told him that 
respondent was “down” in the Kimball parking lot. He did not know what the teacher 
meant so he ran out into the  parking lot, where he found respondent kneeling down 
on one knee with her head facing the ground. He asked respondent if she was ok ay 
but received no response. P aramedics were called, and respondent was transported to 
the hospital  for evaluation . 
7. Mr. Maslyar review ed school surveillance footage to try and determine 
what had happened to respondent. When he did, he saw  respondent staggering across 
campus as she walked toward the parking lot. When she arrived in the parking lot, s he 
fell to the ground, stood up, and fell to the ground again.  
8. The following day, at approximately 5:00 p.m., a Kimball teacher texted 
Mr. Maslyar about a conversation she overheard earlier in the day  between two 
students . According to the teacher, one of the students said he saw respondent obtain 
alcohol from a cabinet in her classroom . Based on the text message, and the 
surveillance camera footage of respondent ’s behavior the day before, Mr. Maslyar 
decided to search her  classroom . Assistant Principals Maureen Riley and David Doyle  
agreed to assist.  
9. Ms. Riley testified at hearing. When she and Mr. Doyle accompanied Mr. 
Maslyar to  respondent’s classroom , she opened a  drawer in a table at the front of the 4 room next to respondent’s desk . Inside, s he located a z iplock  bag filled  with various 
pills. Some of the pills were sealed in blister packs  and o thers were loose in the bag, 
including five small, round , white pills. Those five pills had no markings, and neither 
Mr. Maslyar nor the assistant principals were able to tell what they were. Mr. Maslyar 
took the bag from Ms. Riley and locked it in his office overnight.  
10. The next morning, Mr. Maslyar took the bag of pills to School Resource 
Officer Steve Flores’ s office to see if Officer Flores could identify the five pills that were 
loose in the bag . A short time later, Officer Flores told Mr. Maslyar he was unable to 
identify the pills, and he believed they were likely either herbal supplements or illicit 
drugs. Mr. Maslyar locked the bag in a cabinet in his office and called TUSD Associate 
Superintendent of Human Resources (HR) Tammy Jalique to tell her about the pills.  
11. Ms. Jalique testified at hearing. At approximately 1:30 p.m. on October 7 , 
2022, she went to Kimball, picked up the bag of pills from Mr. Maslyar, and took it  
back to the TUSD HR office. She photographed the bag and then placed it in an 
envelope which she sealed with tape and locked it in a secure vault in the HR office.  
Ms. Jalique also contacted respondent and directed her not to return to campus until 
she provided the administration with a physician’s note stating she was medically 
cleared  to return to work.  
12. Ms. Jalique and Mr. Maslyar  met with respondent on November 16, 2022.  
Respondent’s Tracy Educator’s Association representative was also present. During the 
meeting, Ms. Jalique showed respondent the  photograph she took of the z iplock bag 
and respondent admitted all the pills depicted in the photograph belonged to her. Ms. 
Jalique pointed to the five white pills and asked respondent  what they were. 
Respondent said the pills  were “vitamins ,” including iron pills and a hormonal 
supplement, but then said she could not tell what type of pills they were.  She also 5 explained she was taking epilepsy medication , but that the epilepsy medication was 
not in the bag with the other pills.  
13. On November 18, 2022, Ms. Jalique retrieved the envelope containing 
the bag of pills from the secure vault in the HR office. When she did, the envelope was 
still sealed and did not appear to have been tampered with. Ms. Jalique took the pills 
to be tested at Premier Urgent Care  (Premier) , a local medical facility in Tracy . Premier 
performs biological fluid sample testing and has assisted TUSD in the past with 
expedited presumptive testing when students or employees are believed to be under 
the influence of alcohol or drugs at school.  
14. Marci Pa radiso is the operations manager  at Premier . She has  worked in 
the medical industry for over 40 years and tested many biological fluid samples for 
drugs and alcohol. Ms. Paradiso testified at hearing.  
15. When Ms. Paradiso received the envelope from Ms. Jalique, it was sealed. 
She opened the envelope, removed two of the five white pills, and showed them to 
Jagdish Patel, M.D., who works as a physician at Premier. The Code of Federal 
Regulations requires that drug products in solid oral dosage form be clearly marked or 
imprinted with a code  which permits the unique identification of the drug product and 
its manufacturer or distributor. Because the pills had no markings or imprints, Dr. Patel 
was unable to visually identify what they were, so he  authorized Ms. Paradiso to 
perform a presumptive test of the pills . 
16. Premier typically uses the Abbott Alere 10 Panel Drug Test Dip Card 
(Abbott test) to conduct presumptive tests of urine samples. When a sample is 
received, the person performing the test submerges the end of the card in to the 
sample  and then removes it. Presumptive positive results typically appear on the card 6 within five minutes. Although the results are presumptive, Ms. Paradiso estimates that 
confirmatory tests reveal that the Abbott test is accurate 99 percent of the time.  
17. Ms. Paradiso took the two pills and dissolved them in water. S he then 
submerg ed the Abbot t test card into the solution. After several minutes, a result 
appeared on the card indicating that the solution tested positive for MDMA.  MDMA is 
an illegal, synthetic, psychoactive drug with a chemical structure similar to the 
stimulant methamphetamine and the hallucinogen mescaline.  
18. Dr. Patel testified at hearing. He has been a physician for over 50 years 
and a certified medical review officer (MRO) since the 1980s. As an MRO, he is 
qualified to interpret and certify biological fluid sample tests for the presence of 
alcohol and drugs.  
19. Dr. Patel explained that the Abbott test is an immunoassay test. 
Antibodies are introduced to a biological fluid sample, and if a drug antigen is present 
in the sample,  the antibodies will bind to it and indicate a visible result on the card. Dr. 
Patel acknowledged that the Abbott test  is intended to test for the presence of 
controlled substances in urine, and that it only provides a presumptive  result . 
However, he has no reason to doubt the accuracy of the test, or Ms. Paradiso’s ability 
to use it to test the solution after she dissolved the two pills in water. He also 
explained that dissolving the pills in water would not alter the nature of the pills or 
compromise the accuracy of the immunoassay test, which has increased 
“tremendously” over the last decade. In all his years of medical practice, Dr. Patel has 
never seen a presumptive immunoassay test proven wrong by a subsequent gas 
chromatograph mass spectrometer (GCMS) confirmatory  analysis.  7 20. Dr. Patel confirmed the positive test in a letter to TUSD dated November 
22, 2022. In the letter, he also wrote the following:  
Concerning MDMA/ecstasy, which is structurally related to 
amphetamines, cross -reactions in immunoassays and false -
positive MDMA tests have been reported for trazadone, 
metoprolol, and the fenofibrate metabolite, fenofibric acid.  
21. Dr. Patel explained he obtained information about the false positives he 
mentioned in the letter by reference to medical literature. He does not believe the pills 
Ms. Paradiso tested were trazadone because the tablets did not feature the unique 
markings required by the Code of Federal Regulations. He has no reason to doubt the 
accuracy of the Abbott test in this case, or Ms. Paradiso’s ability to perform it correctly.  
22. When Premier tests a biological fluid sample obtained on site, they 
typically send the sample to another lab for a GCMS  confirmatory  analysis. TUSD asked 
Premier  to send the solution  for GCMS confirmation, but they  declined to do so 
because the solution was not a biological fluid sample obtained on site , and because 
they could not document a chain of custody for the pills from respondent’s classroom 
to the location in the facility where the y were tested . 
Respondent’s Evidence  
RESPONDENT ’S TESTIMONY  
23. Respondent testified at hearing.  She knew she wanted to be a teacher in 
third grade. She received degrees in Spanish and biology from Whittier College before 
earning her teaching credential at California State University, San Bernardino. She 
taught for approximately 29 years. She has not taught since resigning from Kimball but 8 would like to return to teaching.  She has not attempted to renew her credential due to 
the pending disciplinary action.  
24. Respondent occasionally drinks socially. However, she has never 
possessed or consumed alcohol at school. She has never used illicit drugs, and did not 
know what MDMA is until her daughter explained it to her after learning of the test 
results.  
25. Respondent was prescribed trazadone for insomnia in October 2020. The 
prescription was discontinued in September 2021, though she continue s to take the 
remaining pills when necessary to help her sleep. She does not recall whether the pills 
have any stamps or other markings on them.  The last time she took  trazadone was 
approximately two weeks prior to hearing.  Respondent suffered a seizure in March 
2022. She was prescribed seizure  medication , but never brought it to school . 
26. Respondent does not remember  what preceded the episode in the 
parking lot on October 5, 2022. She knows she passed out and recalls a paramedic 
asking if she knew where she was but nothing else.  Medical records received in 
evidence at hearing indicate that respondent had suffered a seizure.  
27. Respondent has taken daily iron pills since her first pregnan cy. In 
October 2022, she was also taking Estroven and Azo on a regular basis  and would 
occasionally take green tea pills for energy in the afternoon . It was not unusual for her  
to bring pills to school in a z iplock bag. She placed the bag in the table drawer 
because the table was next to her desk at the front of the room  and within her control . 
28. During the f all 2022 semester, the second period of the day was 
designated as respondent’s preparatory period, when no students were present in the 
classroom. She typically took vitamins , iron, and any prescription or over the counter 9 medications during the preparatory period because it was when she ate breakfast.  She 
thinks  the pills which tested positive for MDMA were iron or folic acid pills . However, 
she also believes it is possible she brought her trazadone pills to work by mistake , and 
that they may have resulted in a false positive test for MDMA.  
29. Respondent resigned from TUSD for personal and health reasons 
unrelated to the pills found in her classroom , effective May 31, 2023. She was not 
aware  the two pills tested positive for MDMA until after she resigned.  
CHARACTER WITNESS TESTIMONY  
30. Judy Khoutsavanh is a family friend who has know n respondent since the 
1980s. She last saw respondent approximately three years ago, but they regularly 
spea k on the telephone. She has never seen respondent under the influence of illegal 
drugs and does not believe respondent is a drug user. She described respondent as a 
leader in the Lao community.  
31. Vongsa Lasamay is respondent’s younger brother. He h as never known 
his sister to use drugs. On the contrary, she would regularly lecture him when he was 
growing up about  the dangers of using drugs. Mr. Lasamay now sees respondent only 
“once in a blue moon”  and it has been over 20 years since he observed her teaching in 
a classroom.  Nonetheless, he believes she is passionate about teaching and should be 
allowed to keep her credential.  
32. Chris Munger has been an English teacher at Kimball since 2011 and 
shared a classroom with respondent for several years. He believes respondent is a competent teacher. He never saw respondent bring drugs or alcohol to school and 
never saw respondent under the influence of drugs or alcohol. Respondent told him 
the pil ls that tested positive for MDMA did not belong to her.  10 33. William Berry testified at hearing. Respondent’s daughter Emmeleine 
Khoonsirivong is his closest friend. He has known respondent for approximately five 
years. He has never seen respondent possess or use illegal drugs, and he has never 
suspected that she wa s under the influence of illegal drugs. He did not attend Kimball, 
and he is not familiar with respondent’s teaching abilities.  
34. Ms. Khoonsirivong also testified at hearing . She has never seen her 
mother in possession or under the influence of illegal drugs.  She was suffering from 
seizures at the time she was placed on leave at Kimball.  
TOXICOLOGY TESTIMONY  
35. Minh X. Tran is a forensic toxicologist and the laboratory director of Drug 
Detection Laboratories, Inc. , in Sacramento. Mr. Tran  received a Bachelor of Biological 
Sciences  degree in  2008 from California State University, Sacramento . He estimates he 
has tested between 10,000 and 15,000 pills and powders in his career, at least half of which were found to contain MDMA. However, every pill he has ever tested that was 
determined to be MDMA had some sort of imprint or marking on it.  
36. Immunoassay tests such as the one at issue in this case have existed for 
many years. They are typically used to test for the presence of drugs in urine, although they can be used to test drugs dissolved in water. Mr. Tran has never used the Abbott 
test. He believes immunoassay tests such as the Abbott test are reliable, but that their results should be confirmed by a GC MS confirmatory  analysis whenever possible.  He is 
unaware of any studies suggesting that vitamins or iron pills can produce a false positive result for MDMA.  11 LETTERS OF SUPPORT  
37. Respondent submitted numerous  letters of support , several of which 
were written by witnesses who testified on respondent’s behalf at hearing . They 
generally describe respondent as a well -known and respected member of the Lao 
community, a hardworking single mother, and a dedicated teacher.  
Analysis  
38. Complainant bears the burden of proving by clear and convincing 
evidence that the allegations set forth in the Accusation are true, and that they 
constitute cause to discipline respondent’s credential. While four  different causes for 
discipline are alleged, they all pertain to the allegation that respondent brought MDMA to Kimball and  left it unattended in a classroom drawer . 
39. Complainant established that Ms. Riley found  a ziplock bag containing 
various pills in the drawer of a table in respondent’s classroom.  When respondent was 
questioned about the pills, she admitted she brought the bag to school and that all the pills inside were hers.  She then crafted multiple inconsistent explanations of what 
the pills were to evade responsibility for her misconduct. Respondent initially said the 
pills which tested positive for MDMA were vitamins. She then said they were iron pills  
or folic acid . In her testimony at hearing, she suggeste d she may have mistakenly 
taken her trazadone prescription to school, and that the trazadone may have cause a 
false positive test for MDMA.  She told Mr. Munger the pills were not hers.  
40. Ms. Paradiso tested two of the pills using the  Abbott  test after dissolving 
them in water . The test result was presumptive  positive for MDMA . Ms. Paradiso , Dr. 
Patel , and Mr. Tran  all testified that the Abbott test is intended to  test urine for the 
presence of alcohol and drugs . However, they also all testified that it can also be used 12 to test pills by dissolving them in water. Immunoassay tests have existed for many 
years, and Dr. Patel testified that the accuracy of immunoassay tests has increased 
“tremendously” within the last decade. Even Mr. Tran acknowledged that immunoassay 
tests are reliable but cautioned that GC MS confirmatory  analysis should be performed 
when possible.  
41. Complainant proved by clear and convincing evidence that the pills Ms. 
Paradiso tested contained MDMA, and respondent’s testimony that the pills may have 
been iron , folic acid,  or trazadone was unpersuasive for several reasons. First, there is 
no evidence that iron or folic acid can provide a false positive reaction for MDMA 
using an immunoassay test. Although there  is evidence that trazadone can , the pills 
which tested positive here did not feature any of the markings required by the Code of Federal Regula tions  for a prescription medication in pill form. Moreover, trazadone is 
prescribed to help people sleep. There would be no reason for respondent to bring a 
sleep medication to school, particularly considering  her testimony that she 
occasionally had to take green tea pills for energy to stay alert during the day.  
42. In 
Morrison v. State Board of Education  (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, the California 
Supreme Court concluded that a teaching credential cannot be disciplined for immoral 
conduct, unprofessional conduct, or conduct involving moral turpitude “unless that 
conduct indicates that the [educator] is unfit to teach.” ( Id. at p. 229.) The Court 
outlined factors to consider when determining whether an educator’s conduct 
demonstrates unfitness to teach, which have been codified in California Code of 
Regulations, title 5, secti on 80302, subdivision (a). The factors are:  
(1) the likelihood that the conduct may have adversely affected students or 
fellow teachers, and the degree of such adversity anticipated;  13 (2) the proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct;  
(3) the types of credentials held or sought by the person involved;  
(4) any extenuating or aggravating circumstances surrounding the conduct;  
(5) the praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the 
conduct;  
(6) the likelihood of recurrence of the question conduct;  
(7) the extent to which disciplinary action may have an adverse impact or 
chilling effect on the constitutional rights of the person involved, or other 
teachers ; and 
(8) the publicity or notoriety given to the conduct.  
LIKELIHOOD OF ADVERSE EFFECTS ON STUDENTS OR OTHER TEACHERS  
43. Respondent brought MDMA to Kimball and left it unattended in an 
unlocked drawer in her classroom. While there is no evidence that any students were 
adversely affected here, respondent’s decision to bring the substance to school 
endangered the health and safety of her students and demonstrates  a grievous lapse 
in the judgment expected of an educator.  
PROXIMITY OR REMOTENESS IN TIME 
44. Respondent brought the pills into her classroom during the fall semester  
of the 2022- 2023 school year. At the present time, the offending conduct is more 
remote than proximate in time.  14 TYPES OF CREDENTIALS HELD OR SOUGHT  
45. Respondent holds an expired Multiple Subject Teaching Credential.  
EXTENUATING OR AGGRAVATING CIRCUMSTANCES  
46. Neither the Education Code nor the applicable regulations specify what 
constitutes “extenuating circumstances.” However, California Code of Regulations, title 
5, section 80300, subdivision (m), defines “mitigating factor” as “an event or 
circumstance which  demonstrates that the public, school children and the profession 
would be adequately protected by a more lenient degree of adverse action or no 
adverse action whatsoever.”  California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80300, 
subdivision (b), lists aggr avating factors, the presence of which indicate a greater 
degree of discipline is necessary to protect students and the teaching profession. These factors include, in pertinent part: (1) a prior record of adverse action; (2) that the 
misconduct significant ly harmed a child, the public, or the educational system; and (3) 
the credential holder demonstrated indifference toward the consequence of the 
misconduct.  
47. Respondent has no prior record of discipline with the Commission. As 
explained above, no child was harmed by respondent’s misconduct. However, a child 
could have been significantly harmed if they had ingested the MDMA in respondent’s drawer. That respondent did not appreciate that danger demonstrates her  indifference 
toward the potential consequences of bring ing MDMA into her classroom.  
PRAISEWORTHINESS OR BLAMEWORTHINESS OF MOTIVES  
48. There was nothing praiseworthy about respondent’s actions. She brought 
an illegal drug into her classroom where her students could have accessed it . 15 LIKELIHOOD OF RECURRENCE  
49. Respondent resigned from TUSD, effective May 31, 2023. The likelihood 
of the conduc t recurring , at least at Kimball or any other TUSD school, is minimal.  
CHILLING EFFECT  
50. There is no evidence that disciplining respondent would have a chilling 
effect on respondent’s constitutional rights or the constitutional rights of other 
educators.  
PUBLICITY OR NOTORIETY GIVEN TO CONDUCT  
51. No evidence was presented that the conduct at issue was either 
publicized or notorious.  
Conclusion  
52. Complainant bears the burden of proving by clear and convincing 
evidence that respondent engaged in immoral conduct, unprofessional conduct, and  
conduct involving moral turpitude which indicates s he is unfit to teach. When all the 
evidence is considered in light of the Morrison  factors, complainant has met her 
burden.  
LEGAL CONCLUSIONS  
Burden and Standard of Proof  
1. Complainant bears the burden of proving the allegations in the 
Accusation by clear and convincing evidence to a reasonable certainty. ( Gardner v. 16 Commission on Professional Competence  (1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035.)  Clear and 
convincing evidence requires proof that is so clear as to leave no substantial doubt 
and that is sufficiently strong to command the unhesitating assent of every reasonable 
mind. ( In re Marriage of Brooks  (2008) 169 Cal.App.4th 176, 190.)  
Applicable Law  
2. Pursuant to the Education Code, commencing with section 44000, and 
California Code of Regulations, title 5, commencing with section 80000, the 
Commission is responsible for credentialing teachers in public schools in California, 
including issuing credentia ls and taking adverse action against applicants and 
credential holders.  
3. Education Code section 44345 provides in part:  
The Commission may deny any application for the issuance of a credential or for the redenial of a credential made by an applicant who falls under any of the following 
categories:  
[¶] . . . [¶] 
(e) Has committed any act involving moral turpitude.  
[¶] . . . [¶] 
Any denial pursuant to subdivisions (a) to (e), inclusive, shall 
be based upon reasons related to the applicant’s fitness to 
teach or fitness to perform other duties which the 
credential would authorize the applicant to perform.  17 4. Moral turpitude has been described as “any crime or misconduct 
committed without excuse, or ‘any dishonest or immoral’ act not necessarily a crime.” 
(Clerici v. Department of Motor Vehicles  (1990) 224 Cal.App.3d 1016, 1017.)  
5. Education Code section 44421 provides in part:  
The Commission on Teacher Credentialing shall privately 
admonish, publicly reprove, revoke, or suspend for immoral 
or unprofessional conduct, or for persistent defiance of, and refusal to obey, the laws regulating the duties of persons 
serving in the publi c school system, or for any cause that 
would have warranted the denial of an application for a 
credential or the renewal thereof, or for evident unfitness for service.  
6. The California Supreme Court has recognized that the terms “immoral 
conduct” and “ unprofessional conduct ” substantially overlap one another and conduct 
that constitutes one often includes the other. (
Morrison v. State Bd. of Ed. , supra , 1 
Cal.3d 214, 221, fn. 9.) Additionally, in San Diego Unified School District v. Commission 
on Professional Competence  (2011) 194 Cal.App.4th 1454, the court explained:  
Moreover, the definition of immoral or unprofessional 
conduct must be considered in conjunction with the unique 
position of public school teachers, upon whom are imposed 
“responsibilities and limitations on freedom of action which 
do not exist in regard to  other callings.” [Citation.]  
(Id., at p. 1466.)  18 7. Immoral conduct is sometime considered as synonymous with 
“dishonesty” or a high degree of unfairness. ( Board of Education of the San Francisco 
Unified School District v. Weiland  (1960) 179 Cal.App.3d 8089, 811.) The court 
explained in Palo Verde Unified School District of Riverside v. Hensey  (190) 9 
Cal.App.3d 967, 972:  
The term “immoral” has been defined as that which is 
hostile to the welfare of the general public and contrary to 
good morals. Immorality includes conduct inconsistent with 
rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, 
dissoluteness; or as willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct 
showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable 
members of the community, and as an inconsiderate 
attitude toward good order and the public welfare.  
8. “Evident unfitness for service” means a teacher is clearly not fit, not 
adapted to or unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of temperamental defects 
or inadequacies. ( Woodland v. Joint Unified School District v. Commission on 
Professional Competence  (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444.) “Unlike ‘unprofessional 
conduct,’ ‘evident unfitness for service’ connotes a fixed character trait, presumably 
not remediable merely on receipt of notice that one’s conduct fails to meet the 
expectations of the employing school district.” ( Ibid.) 
9. Education Code section 44440, subdivision (b), provides:  
The suspension or expiration of any credential, its surrender 
without the written consent of the commission, or a 19 revocation pursuant to Section 44423 does not deprive the 
commission of its authority to do the following:  
(1) Institute or continue a disciplinary proceeding against the credential holder upon any ground provided by law.  
(2) Enter an order suspending or revoking the credential.  
(3) Issue a public reproval or private admonition to the credential holder.  
10. California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80300, states  in part:  
[¶] . . . [¶] 
(b) “Aggravating factor” is an event or circumstance which 
demonstrates that a greater degree of adverse action for an act of professional misconduct is needed to adequately 
protect the public, schoolchildren or the profession. 
Aggravating factors may include,  but are not limited to, the 
following:  
[¶] . . . [¶]  
(3) that the misconduct was surrounded by or followed by 
bad faith, dishonesty or other violations of the laws 
governing educators;  
[¶] . . . [¶]  20 11. As set forth in Factual Finding  42, California Code of Regulations, title 5, 
section 80302, subdivision (a), sets forth  the factors  to consider “to determine the 
relationship between the alleged misconduct and the applicant’s or holder’s fitness, 
competence, or ability to effectively perform the duties authorized by the credential.”  
Cause s for Discipline  
12. Based on the Factual Findings and Legal Conclusions as a whole, 
complainant established by clear and convincing evidence that respondent engaged in  
unprofessional conduct when she possessed MDMA in her classroom. Consequently, cause exists to discipline her credential, pursuant to Education Code section 44421.  
13. Based on the Factual Findings and Legal Conclusions as a whole, 
complainant established by clear and convincing evidence that respondent’s possession of MDMA in her classroom demonstrates her evident unfitness for service. Consequently, cause exists to dis cipline her credential, pursuant to Education Code 
section 44421.  
14. Based on the Factual Findings and Legal Conclusions as a whole, 
complainant established by clear and convincing evidence that respondent committed acts of moral turpitude by possessing MDMA in her classroom. Consequently, cause 
exists to discipline her cre dential, pursuant to Education Code sections 44421 and 
44345, subdivision (e).  
15. Based on the Factual Findings and Legal Conclusions as a whole, 
complainant established by clear and convincing evidence that respondent engaged in 
immoral conduct by possessing MDMA in her classroom.  21 Aggravating Factor  
16. Respondent has now provided multiple inconsistent explanation s of what 
the pills found in her classroom are and who they belong to. Her bad faith and 
disho nesty are aggravating factor s to be considered  in determining the appropriate 
discipline.  
Appropriate Discipline  
17. Pursuant to Education Code section 44421, the Commission shall 
privately admonish or publicly reprove a credential holder, or revoke or suspend her  
credential, if the credential holder has engaged in immoral or unprofessional conduct, 
action that warrants denial of an application for a credential or the renewal thereof, or 
is evidently unfit for service.  Careful consideration has been given to the available 
disciplinary options. Even assuming respondent’s possession of MDMA in her 
classroom was an isolated incident, it represents a grievous lapse in judgment 
expected of an educator. When all the evidence is considered , complainant 
demonstrated that respondent is unfit to teach, and revocation of her  credential is 
necessary to protect children, the public, and the teaching profession.  
// 
// // 22 ORDER  
The Clear Multiple Subject Teaching Credential  issued to respondent Jacquel ine 
Khamsy Palafox, aka Jacqueline Khamsy Bounponechannita , by the California 
Commission on Teacher Credentialing is  REVOKED.
DATE:  March  13, 2025  
MATTHEW S. BLOCK  
Administrative Law Judge  
Office of Administrative Hearings  
 
