BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
In the Matter of the Accusation Against: 
MICHAEL JASON WILLIS, Respondent 
Agency Case No. 2-381361952 
OAH No. 2024010964 
PROPOSED DECISION 
Sean Gavin, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ), Office of Administrative Hearings 
(OAH), State of California, heard this matter on June 24, 2024, in Sacramento, 
California. 
Steve J. Pyun, Deputy Attorney General, represented Mary Vixie Sandy, Ed.D. 
(complainant), Executive Director of the California Commission on Teacher 
Credentialing (Commission). 
Joshua F. Richtel, Attorney at Law, represented Michael Jason Willis
(respondent), who was present throughout the hearing. 
Evidence was received, the record closed, and the parties submitted the matter 
for decision on June 24, 2024. 2 FACTUAL FINDINGS 
Jurisdictional Matters 
1. On September 5, 2002, the Commission issued respondent an Emergency 
30-Day Substitute Teaching Permit. The permit expired November 1, 2008, and has not 
been renewed. 
2. On March 19, 2007, the Commission issued respondent a Preliminary 
Designated Subjects Adult Education Teaching Credential: Full Time. The credential 
expired April 1, 2012, and has not been renewed. 
3. On August 10, 2007, the Commission issued respondent a Short-Term 
Staff Permit. The permit expired August 1, 2008, and has not been renewed. 
4. On November 6, 2007, the Commission issued respondent an Intern 
Education Specialist Instruction Credential. The credential expired December 1, 2009, 
and has not been renewed.
5. On December 1, 2009, the Commission issued respondent a Level I 
Education Specialist Instruction Credential. The credential expired January 1, 2015, and 
has not been renewed.
6. On December 28, 2011, the Commission issued respondent a Level I 
Education Specialist Instruction Credential (Added Authorization). The credential 
expired January 1, 2015, and has not been renewed.
7. On June 17, 2014, the Commission issued respondent a Level II Education 
Specialist Instruction Credential (Credential). The Credential was in full force at all 3 relevant times mentioned herein and, as of the hearing date, was scheduled to expire 
on July 1, 2024, unless renewed. 
8. On November 7, 2023, complainant, acting solely in her official capacity, 
signed and thereafter filed an Accusation seeking to discipline respondent’s Credential 
based on his alleged unprofessional conduct, acts involving moral turpitude, immoral 
conduct, and evident unfitness for service. Specifically, complainant alleged that on 
January 5, 2022, while employed as a special education teacher at River Bluff 
Elementary School (River Bluff) in the Central Unified School District (District), 
respondent was arrested after he picked up a 15-year-old prostitute in his car. Further, 
complainant alleged that when a District investigator interviewed respondent on 
March 1, 2022, he made several false and misleading statements. Respondent timely 
filed a Notice of Defense. This hearing followed. 
Complainant’s Evidence 
FRESNO POLICE DEPARTMENT REPORT 
9. On January 5, 2022, officers of the Fresno Police Department were 
surveilling an area known for prostitution. They observed Victim 1, an individual they 
knew from prior experience to be a 15-year-old working as a prostitute, standing on a 
street corner. Thereafter, they saw respondent approach Victim 1 in his truck and 
communicate with her. She nodded and pointed to a nearby parking lot behind a 
motel. Respondent drove to the area she indicated. Victim 1 then walked to 
respondent’s truck and got into the front passenger seat. The officers immediately 
intervened. 
10. When the officers interviewed respondent, he told them he was in the 
area to buy a recharger for his vaping device at a gas station. When asked what he 4 discussed with Victim 1, he said she offered to pay him $100 for a ride. He drove to the 
parking lot behind the motel because he did not want people to see Victim 1 get in his 
truck. They then discussed a price but not a specific sex act because the police 
intervened too quickly. He said he had never met Victim 1 before. He did not know her 
age but did not believe she was a child. 
11. Respondent acknowledged to the police he had picked up prostitutes in 
the same area before. In the past, he had always asked for oral sex in his truck. 
Respondent also told the officers he was married, had a 14-year-old son, was a teacher 
at River Bluff, and needed help for his sex addiction. Based on the officers’ 
observations and respondent’s statements, they arrested and cited him for loitering for 
the purpose of prostitution, in violation of a Fresno city ordinance. The officers then 
prepared a police report summarizing their observations and respondent’s statements. 
DISTRICT INVESTIGATION AND RESPONDENT ’S INTERVIEW  
12. Jack Kelejian is the District’s Assistant Superintendent of Human 
Resources. One of his job duties is to handle employee discipline. To assist in that 
function, the District subscribes to a California Department of Justice alert system that 
notifies the District when any employee is arrested. Via that alert system, Mr. Kelejian 
learned of respondent’s arrest on January 6, 2022. The District immediately placed 
respondent on administrative leave pending an investigation. 
13. In mid-February 2022, the District hired William Leist of Leist and 
Associates to investigate the matter. Mr. Leist has been a licensed private investigator 
for approximately 10 years. Before that, he worked for the California Highway Patrol 
for 30 years. When he retired, he was the Statewide Commander of Internal Affairs. He 
has extensive experience and training in conducting investigations. 5 14. Mr. Leist reviewed the Fresno Police Department report. On March 1, 
2022, Mr. Leist interviewed respondent at the office of his attorney, Mr. Richtel. Before 
the interview, Mr. Leist had respondent sign an Administrative Investigation Interview 
Acknowledgment. The form provided, in relevant part:
This is an administrative inquiry on behalf of the Central 
Unified School District, as such, the District expects 
complete cooperation with the interview process and that 
any and all answers to questions or information you divulge 
to be accurate, complete and truthful to the best of your 
abilities. 
Any refusal to answer, or any type of evasion, deception, 
dishonesty or lack of cooperation on your part, could 
constitute insubordination and could lead to disciplinary 
action up to and including dismissal. 
15. Based on the police report and respondent’s interview statements, Mr. 
Leist then prepared a written investigative report, dated March 9, 2022. At hearing, Mr. 
Leist testified consistently with his report. 
16. As noted in Mr. Leist’s report, respondent described the events before 
and during his arrest. Specifically, he told Mr. Leist he was in the area looking for a 
Dumpster to place his trash. He explained the Dumpsters closer to his home were 
locked, so he drove to an area where he knew of unlocked Dumpsters. 
17. Respondent then told Mr. Leist he was stopped at a stop sign when 
Victim 1 approached his truck and asked for a ride. Respondent declined. He 
continued driving until he found another Dumpster. There, Victim 1 again approached 6 him and asked for a ride. Respondent agreed because he felt bad for her. As soon as 
Victim 1 got in the truck, she grabbed respondent’s crotch and asked if he had any 
money. Respondent told Mr. Leist, “Before I event got the chance to pull over and tell 
her to get the hell out of my car, I was surrounded by cops. She wasn’t in my car for 
more than 30 feet.” 
18. Mr. Leist asked respondent whether he had ever before picked up a 
prostitute for the purpose of sex. Respondent said no. Mr. Richtel added that 
respondent qualified for a First Offender program through the City of Fresno, 
completed a class, and had all charged dropped. 
19. Mr. Leist then asked respondent whether the police questioned him, to 
which he replied, “Yes. I told them exactly what I told you. They didn’t believe me.” He 
further explained he was scared because the police had surrounded him with their 
guns drawn. He told Mr. Leist three times that what he said to the police was the same 
as what he said in his interview. 
20. Mr. Leist then told respondent the police report indicated he had said he 
was in the area to buy a vaping recharger. Respondent agreed, explaining, “Yes, I 
forgot about that.” Mr. Leist also told respondent the police report indicated he had 
said Victim 1 offered $100 for a ride. Respondent denied that. Next, Mr. Leist told 
respondent the police report indicated he had said he drove to the parking lot behind 
the motel because he did not want people to see Victim 1 get in his truck. Respondent 
acknowledged saying that to the police. He explained he did not want to reveal he was 
illegally dumping his trash. 
21. Additionally, Mr. Leist told respondent the police report indicated he had 
acknowledged discussing a price with Victim 1, but not a specific sex act. Respondent 7 replied, “I didn’t say that.” Mr. Leist then told respondent the police report indicated 
he told the police he had previously picked up prostitutes in the same area and always 
asked for oral sex in his truck. Respondent replied, “That is not true.” Mr. Leist asked if 
respondent believed the police “were just making stuff up,” to which respondent 
replied, “They were telling me that stuff. They were telling me what people do in the 
area.”
22. Finally, Mr. Leist told respondent the police report indicated he has asked 
the police for help with his sex addiction. Respondent replied, “They told me they 
offered a class and if I took the class, it would be removed from my record. I told them 
I was a teacher and was arguing with them and said this would basically ruin my 
credential.” Respondent denied telling the police he had previously picked up 
prostitutes in the area and received oral sex from them. He claimed the police 
fabricated that information. He did not know why they did so. 
23. At that point, Mr. Leist told respondent he did not believe him. He 
reminded respondent he had signed an acknowledgment promising he would be 
truthful. Mr. Leist then suspended the interview and privately informed Mr. Richtel he 
planned to request the police officers’ body camera footage to verify respondent’s 
statements. Mr. Richtel spoke with respondent privately for a few minutes, at which 
point Mr. Richtel told Mr. Leist respondent wanted to “come clean.” 
24. Mr. Leist resumed the interview, at which point respondent admitted he 
asked the police for help with his sex addiction. He also admitted he had told the 
police he picked up prostitutes in the past. Specifically, he twice picked up prostitutes 
in the two to three months before his arrest. He explained the first time, he got 
nervous and asked the person to get out of his car. Mr. Leist said he did not believe 8 that because respondent had told the police he had previously requested oral sex in 
his truck. Respondent then said the second time, he paid a prostitute $80 for oral sex. 
25. In addition, respondent acknowledged he picked up Victim 1 for the 
purpose of engaging in sex. Respondent insisted he did not know Victim 1 was 15 
years old. When the police ultimately told him her age, he got scared and told the 
police he wanted help for his sex addiction. Mr. Leist asked respondent, “What is your 
responsibility as a grown man before engaging in sexual relations with a person whose 
age is questionable?” Respondent replied, “Ask how old she is.” He acknowledged he 
did not ask Victim 1 her age. Finally, Mr. Leist asked respondent why he lied during the 
interview. Respondent replied, “Multiple reasons. One, I love my job and I am trying 
everything I can do to keep my job.” 
26. On April 12, 2022, after receiving Mr. Leist’s report, the District served 
respondent with a Notice of Intent to Recommend Suspension without Pay and 
Dismissal. On April 22, 2022, respondent resigned from the District, effective June 30, 
2022. On May 11, 2022, the District notified the Commission of respondent’s 
resignation and the circumstances preceding it. 
Respondent’s Evidence 
27. Respondent testified at hearing. Between 2006 and 2011 he worked for a 
different school district as a special education teacher. At the end of the 2010-2011 
school year, he was named teacher of the year in that district. However, he wanted to 
work in the district where his children attended school, so for the 2011-2012 school 
year, he began teaching for the District. He stayed at the District for 11 years. Over 
that time, he coached several sports teams and briefly served as the athletic director. 9 In May 2021, he won a “Gandhi Award“ from the school for having a “management 
style [that] creates a peaceful classroom environment.” 
28. Ultimately, respondent resigned from the District “for several reasons,” 
including being embarrassed by his behavior. In April 2023, he wrote a letter to the 
Commission explaining his actions. Regarding his reasons for resigning, he wrote: 
The reason I chose to resign from Central Unified School 
District rather than go through the dismissal process, was 
not a complete admission [of] guilt but rather an action to 
secure financial stability for my family. I don't believe that 
there is a sufficient nexus between my off duty conduct and 
my fitness and ability to teach. I was concerned that there 
would be a period that I would receive no income while 
fighting the allegations and I couldn't afford to take that 
financial hit. I told the district that I would resign if they 
paid me out for the remainder of the year. Which they 
agreed. Though it pained me to leave a school that I had 
served and loved - the same school my own children were 
attending at the time. I needed to ensure that I had an 
income to provide for my wife and two children, while I 
tried to secure a teaching position with another district. 
29. Respondent has since found a new position teaching for the Firebaugh-
Las Deltas Unified School District, where he teaches special education to students 12 
to 14 years old. He enjoys teaching and does not believe his conduct poses a risk to 
students. He loves his job so much that, when Mr. Leist interviewed him, he lied 
because he hoped it would help him keep his job and Credential. In his letter to the 10 Commission, he explained, “The dishonesty noted in the investigation by Central was a 
crude attempt on my part to keep a job which I had loved, and to which I had 
dedicated my life, which is helping students for special needs be the best versions of 
themselves.” 
30. Regarding the conduct underlying his arrest, respondent noted in his 
letter, in relevant part, “The information stated in the file from Central Unified School 
District states that I was arrested for soliciting prostitution of a 15-year-old minor is 
untrue and false.” Instead, he clarified he was cited for “Loitering for Prostitution,” but 
the City attorney dropped the citation 10 days later. He submitted a letter from the 
Deputy City Attorney confirming as much. He testified that before his arrest, he had 
twice hired a prostitute, but both times “chickened out” and “didn’t complete the act.” 
On cross-examination, he clarified he meant he had never “slept” with a prostitute. 
However, he twice paid for and received oral sex from a prostitute. 
31. At hearing, respondent explained he was having marital problems and 
“mentally checking out” at the time of his arrest. He does not believe he has a sex 
addiction. Rather, he feels more like “an addict,” but not necessarily a “sex addict.” In 
the past, his addictive behavior manifested differently. For example, he used to be 
agoraphobic. Later in life, he played video games a lot and loved buying scratch-off 
lottery tickets. He believes all his addictive behaviors stem from his underlying anxiety. 
He coped with his anxiety by “checking out unknowingly.” 
32. After respondent’s arrest, he “hit rock bottom” and sought therapy. His 
son was close to Victim 1’s age, which scared him. With his wife, he attended Life Star, 
an outpatient therapy program to treat his sex addiction. Life Star entailed three 
months of intensive group therapy, group therapy with his wife, and individual 
therapy, followed by reading a book series and then “individual work.” He attended 11 Life Star for approximately eight months. He praised his Life Star therapist, though at 
hearing he could not correctly recall the therapist’s first name. 
33. While completing Life Star, respondent also attended weekly Sex Addict 
Anonymous (SA) meetings. His work in SA helped him see how his addiction affected 
him and those around him. He gained insight into why he engaged in “risky behavior.” 
34. After Life Star, respondent began attending Refuge Recovery, a recovery 
program for “all addictions” based on Buddhist principles. He attends two Refuge 
Recovery meetings per week, at which he and the other attendees meditate and review 
written materials. As part of Refuge Recovery, he and his wife check in with one 
another nightly to “stay grounded and connected.” In their check-ins, they thank one 
another for something, ask whether either of them “acted out” that day, and verify 
they have both meditated. The check-ins follow an acronym, F.A.N.O.S. The letters 
stand for feelings, affirmations, needs, and spirituality. Respondent could not recall the 
meaning of the O. 
35. Respondent also completed “Breaking the Chains,” a program for first 
offenders offered through the Fresno Police Department. Respondent testified he 
completed the three-day program voluntarily. He also testified he did not pay the fine 
associated with his arrest and citation because he believed completing Breaking the 
Chains satisfied his obligations. The program presenter discussed her experience as a 
sex-trafficked minor. Respondent gained “a pretty good perspective” from the 
program.
36. Based on his completion of Life Star and Breaking the Chains, as well as 
his ongoing attendance at Refuge Recovery and the support of his wife and family, 
respondent believes he is unlikely to reoffend. He has learned from this experience to 12 “Be who I am and not who I want or think I am.” His life is much better now and he 
more fully appreciates what he has. Before his arrest, he felt “like too little butter 
scraped over too much bread.” Now, he is glad not to be in “a dark place” anymore. 
CHARACTER SUPPORT LETTERS 
37. At hearing, respondent submitted three letters of support. His mother-in-
law wrote a letter in which she described respondent as “a good friend to me and my 
family.” In her opinion, respondent is “honest, hard-working, and personable.” She 
praised him as a knowledgeable and responsible teacher and coach. Her letter did not 
mention respondent’s arrest, the conduct underlying the arrest, or respondent’s 
rehabilitation therefrom. 
38. Josie Salcido has been a special education aide for the District for more 
than 20 years. She has known respondent for 10 years and served as an aide in his 
classroom. She characterized him as “an exceptional teacher” who was “very respectful 
toward staff, parents, and students and handled himself with poise and proficiency in 
every aspect.” She believes he is “a family man” who “did not take part in any sort of 
misconduct or inappropriate behavior.” She described the circumstances leading to his 
resignation as “a bad situation” but clarified “this incident does not speak to his 
character, his professionalism, or his abilities as a teacher.” 
39. Craig Schorling worked as a teacher alongside respondent for seven 
years at River Bluff. He described respondent as a dedicated and caring teacher and 
coach. He noted, “I was made aware of the allegations being investigated in regards to 
[respondent]. My first and current thought was that this is not something that changes 
my opinion of his professional work ethic and dedication to teaching.” 13 LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 
Burden and Standard of Proof 
1. Complainant bears the burden of proving the existence of grounds for 
disciplining respondent’s Credential and must do so by clear and convincing evidence 
to a reasonable certainty. (  (1983) 33 Cal.3d 532, 536 
[“When an administrative agency initiates an action to suspend or revoke a license, the 
burden of proving the facts necessary to support the action rests with the agency 
making the allegation”];  (1985) 164 
Cal.App.3d 1036, 1039-1040 [recognizing that the clear and convincing evidence 
standard applies to proceedings to discipline a teacher’s credential, whereas the lesser 
preponderance of the evidence standard applies to proceedings to dismiss a teacher 
from particular employment].) “The courts have defined clear and convincing evidence 
as evidence which is so clear as to leave no substantial doubt and as sufficiently strong 
to command the unhesitating assent of every reasonable mind. [Citations.] It has been 
said that a preponderance calls for probability, while clear and convincing proof 
demands a high probability [citations].” ( (1978) 83 Cal.App.3d 890, 899.) 
Causes for Discipline 
2. Complainant proved by clear and convincing evidence that respondent 
engaged in the misconduct alleged in the Accusation. Specifically, on January 5, 2022, 
respondent picked up a 15-year-old girl for the purpose of paying her for a sex act. He 
was arrested and ultimately resigned from the District as a result. During the District’s 
investigation, he lied to the investigator several times because he wanted to preserve 
his job and Credential.14 3. The Commission may discipline a credential based on the holder’s 
unprofessional conduct. (Ed. Code, § 44421.) Respondent’s conduct—namely, 
attempting to hire a child to perform a sex act and then lying about his conduct 
during the District’s investigation—was unprofessional because it violated the rules or 
ethical code of the teaching profession and was unbecoming of a teacher in good 
standing. (  (1953) 41 Cal.2d 546, 553; quoting, 66 Corpus Juris, 
p. 55.) Cause therefore exists to discipline respondent’s Credential for unprofessional 
conduct pursuant to Education Code section 44421. 
4. The Commission may discipline a credential “for any cause that would 
have warranted the denial of an application for a credential or the renewal thereof.” 
(Ed. Code, § 44421.) An application for a credential may be denied if the applicant “has 
committed any act involving moral turpitude.” (Ed. Code, § 44345, subd. (e).) “Moral 
turpitude” has been defined as “everything done contrary to justice, honesty, modesty 
or good morals.” (  (1979) 89 Cal.App.3d 30, 36.) 
An act involves moral turpitude if it involves a serious breach of a duty owed to 
another or to society. (  (2001) 25 Cal.4th 11, 16.)
5. Respondent’s attempt to hire a child to perform a sex act and his 
subsequent lies about his conduct during the District’s investigation constitute acts 
involving moral turpitude. Cause therefore exists to discipline his Credential for 
committing acts involving moral turpitude pursuant to Education Code sections 44421 
and 44345, subdivision (e).
6. The Commission may discipline a credential based on the holder’s 
immoral conduct. (Ed. Code, § 44421.) In describing what constitutes “immoral 
conduct” within the context of the Education Code, a California appeals court noted:15 The term “immoral” has been defined generally as that 
which is hostile to the welfare of the general public and 
contrary to good morals. Immorality has not been confined 
to sexual matters, but includes conduct inconsistent with 
rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, 
dissoluteness; or as willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct 
showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable 
members of the community, and as an inconsiderate 
attitude toward good order and the public welfare.
(  (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 
811, (quoting (1951) 36 Cal.2d 734, 740.))
7. Respondent’s attempt to hire a child to perform a sex act and his 
subsequent lies about his conduct during the District’s investigation constitute 
immoral conduct. Cause therefore exists to discipline his Credential for immoral 
conduct pursuant to Education Code section 44421. 
8. The Commission may discipline a credential based on the holder’s 
evident unfitness for service. (Ed. Code, § 44421.) “Evident unfitness for service” means 
a teacher is clearly not fit, not adapted to or unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by 
reason of temperamental defects or inadequacies. (
 (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444.) “Unlike 
‘unprofessional conduct,’ ‘evident unfitness for service’ connotes a fixed character trait, 
presumably not remediable merely on receipt of notice that one’s conduct fails to 
meet the expectations of the employing school district.” ( .) 16 9. Here, complainant did not prove respondent’s attempt to hire a child to 
perform a sex act demonstrated his evident unfitness for service because there was 
insufficient evidence to show a “fixed character trait.” However, complainant did prove 
by clear and convincing evidence that respondent’s dishonesty with the District 
investigator demonstrated his evident unfitness for service. Specifically, respondent 
signed an acknowledgement in which he promised to tell the truth. Then, he 
immediately lied to the District investigator, blatantly and repeatedly. When he finally 
told the truth, it was only after the investigator threatened to review the police 
officers’ body camera footage. He acknowledged he lied for personal gain in the form 
of keeping his job and Credential. 
10. Moreover, respondent’s hearing testimony was not credible. His 
testimony was inconsistent with his statements to the District investigator and with his 
own written statement submitted to the Commission. For example, he denied a sex 
addiction at hearing, but clearly confessed to one in several previous circumstances. 
He also initially denied consummating any sex act with a prostitute. When further 
questioned on cross-examination, however, he clarified he never “slept” with a 
prostitute but paid for and received oral sex twice before. Apart from such a 
distinction being unpersuasive and unconvincing, it was also inconsistent with his 
statements to the police and to the District investigator. Finally, respondent’s 
statements about the nature and extent of his rehabilitative efforts were not credible. 
Despite his claims about the importance and impact of his therapy and Refuge 
Recovery work, he could not recall the first name of his therapist and could not recall 
the acronym of the supposedly nightly check-ins he completes with his wife. Similarly, 
he claimed his completion of Breaking the Chains was voluntary but in reality, he 
completed the program to comply with the City’s First Offender Program and have his 
charges dismissed. 17 11. Complainant proved by clear and convincing evidence that respondent 
engaged in repeated acts of dishonesty. As a result, cause exists to discipline his 
Credential for evident unfitness for service pursuant to Education Code section 44421. 
FACTORS 
12. In (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, the California 
Supreme Court concluded a teaching credential cannot be disciplined for immoral 
conduct, unprofessional conduct, or conduct involving moral turpitude “unless that 
conduct indicates that the [educator] is unfit to teach.” ( . at p. 229.) The Court 
outlined factors to consider when determining whether an educator’s conduct 
demonstrates unfitness to teach, which have been codified in California Code of 
Regulations, title 5, section 80302, subdivision (a). The criteria are as follows: (1) the 
likelihood of adverse effects on students, fellow teachers, or the educational 
community; (2) the proximity or remoteness in time of the misconduct; (3) the type of 
credential held by respondent; (4) extenuating or aggravating circumstances; (5) 
praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of motives; (6) likelihood of recurrence; (7) the 
extent to which disciplinary action may chill or have an adverse impact upon the 
exercise of constitutional rights among teachers or other persons involved; and (8) the 
publicity or notoriety of respondent’s misconduct. 
13. Respondent’s unprofessional conduct was likely to have an adverse effect 
on the educational community as a whole. His unprofessional conduct occurred less 
than three years ago, which is fairly recent. Respondent’s Credential enables him to 
work closely with students receiving special education, who are often among the most 
vulnerable and the least able to advocate for themselves. Respondent bears the sole 
responsibility for his unprofessional conduct. Given respondent’s lack of candor about 
his conduct, coupled with his fairly minimal corroborating evidence of rehabilitation, 18 there is a likelihood he would engage in additional misconduct in the future. 
Disciplining respondent’s Credential is unlikely to have a negative impact on other 
teachers’ exercise of their constitutional rights. There was no evidence about the 
publicity or notoriety of respondent’s misconduct. 
AGGRAVATING AND MITIGATING FACTORS
14. The Commission’s regulations define “aggravating factor” as “an event or 
circumstance which demonstrates that a greater degree of adverse action for an act of 
professional misconduct is needed to adequately protect the public, schoolchildren or 
the profession.” (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80300, subd. (b).) The definition includes six 
examples:
(1) a prior record of adverse action including the nature and 
extent of that record; 
(2) that the misconduct evidences multiple acts of 
wrongdoing or demonstrate a pattern of misconduct;
(3) that the misconduct was surrounded by or followed by 
bad faith, dishonesty or other violation of the laws 
governing educators;
(4) that the misconduct significantly harmed a child 
entrusted to the care of a credential holder or applicant, 
significantly harmed the public or the educational system; 
(5) that the holder or applicant demonstrated indifference 
toward the consequence of the misconduct, which includes 
failure to comply with known court orders; or19 (6) that the holder or applicant had prior notice, warnings 
or reprimands for similar conduct from any reliable source. 
15. Here, several of the aggravating factors are present. Specifically, 
respondent’s misconduct included not only the initial acts on January 5, 2022, but also 
his repeated dishonesty during the District’s investigation. In lying to the District 
investigator, respondent demonstrated both indifference toward the consequences of 
his actions as well as a disregard for the acknowledgement he signed promising to tell 
the truth. 
16. Neither the Education Code nor the regulations adopted by the 
Commission specify what constitutes “extenuating circumstances.” However, the 
California Code of Regulations defines “mitigating factor” as “an event or circumstance 
which demonstrates that the public, schoolchildren and the profession would be 
adequately protected by a more lenient degree of adverse action or no adverse action 
whatsoever.” (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80300, subd. (m).) The definition includes seven 
examples:
(1) absence of any prior record of adverse action over many 
years of educational service, coupled with present 
misconduct which is not deemed most serious; 
(2) lack of harm to the person who is the object of the 
misconduct; 
(3) emotional or physical difficulties suffered by the holder 
or applicant which substantially contributed to the 
misconduct; provided that the difficulties were not the 
product of illegal conduct by the credential holder or 20 applicant, such as illegal drug or substance abuse; and 
further provided that the credential holder or applicant has 
established through clear and convincing evidence that he 
or she no longer has such difficulties; 
(4) a demonstration of good character of the applicant or 
holder attested to by references from the educational 
community or the general community from individuals 
aware of the extent of the applicant's or holder's 
misconduct; 
(5) objective action taken by the applicant or holder, 
spontaneously demonstrating remorse at the time of the 
misconduct, and recognition of the wrongdoing which is 
designed to timely make amends for the consequences of 
the misconduct; 
(6) the proximity or remoteness in time relative to the 
seriousness of the misconduct; or
(7) the nature and extent of subsequent rehabilitation. 
17. Here, respondent established the presence of some mitigating factors, 
but they are few and limited. He has no record of prior adverse action. Although he 
was experiencing some emotional difficulties as of January 2022, he did not credibly 
explain how those difficulties contributed to his dishonesty to the District investigator. 
Rather, he acknowledged he lied to the investigator so he could maintain his job and 
Credential. His mother-in-law and former colleagues attested to his good character 21 before the incident, but they did not explain what steps he has taken to rehabilitate 
himself, nor did they address his lies to the District investigator. 
APPROPRIATE DISCIPLINE
18. Complainant proved there is cause to discipline respondent’s Credential
for unprofessional conduct, engaging in acts involving moral turpitude, immoral 
conduct, and evident unfitness for service. Based thereon, the Commission “shall 
privately admonish, publicly reprove, revoke or suspend” the Credential. (Ed. Code, 
§ 44421.) When determining what level of discipline to impose, the Commission should 
consider the aggravating and mitigating factors previously identified. (Cal. Code Regs., 
tit. 5, § 80300, subds. (b), (m).) 
19. As discussed above, complainant proved respondent engaged in the 
misconduct alleged in the Accusation. Complainant further proved, after applying the 
 factors, that respondent’s conduct indicates his unfitness to teach. When all 
the evidence is considered, there was insufficient evidence of rehabilitation or 
respondent’s continued fitness to perform the duties authorized under his Credential, 
even on a probationary basis. Based on the presence of multiple aggravating factors, 
coupled with the lack of significant or strong mitigating factors, the appropriate 
discipline here to protect the public is to revoke respondent’s Credential. 
// 
//
//
// 22 ORDER 
The Level II Education Specialist Instruction Credential, and all other credentials, 
certificates, and authorizations issued to respondent Michael Jason Willis by the 
Commission, are REVOKED.
DATE: July 24, 2024
SEAN GAVIN 
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings 
 