BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
In the Matter of the First Amended Accusation Against: 
JEFFREY COLLINS SCOTT, Respondent 
Agency Case No. 2-441310505 
OAH No. 2024050936 
PROPOSED DECISION 
Patrice De Guzman Huber, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ), Office of 
Administrative Hearings (OAH), State of California, heard this matter by 
videoconference on November 18, 2024, from Sacramento, California. 
Phillip L. Arthur, Deputy Attorney General, represented complainant Mary Vixie 
Sandy, Ed.D., Executive Director of the California Commission on Teacher Credentialing 
(Commission), State of California. 
Matthew R. Chevedden, Esq., represented respondent Jeffrey Collins Scott, who 
appeared. 
Evidence was received, the record closed, and the matter submitted for decision 
on November 18, 2024. 2 FACTUAL FINDINGS
Teaching Credentials 
1. On August 13, 1992, the Commission issued respondent a Certificate of 
Clearance. It expired on September 1, 1997.
2. On August 3, 1993, the Commission issued respondent a Preliminary 
Five-Year Multiple Subject Teaching Credential. It expired on September 1, 1998.
3. On October 12, 1998, the Commission issued respondent an Emergency 
Long Term Multiple Subject Teaching Permit. It expired on November 1, 2000.
4. On June 28, 2000, the Commission issued respondent a Clear Multiple 
Subject Teaching Credential (credential). The credential will expire on July 1, 2025, 
unless renewed. 
5. On January 17, 2008, the Commission issued respondent a Clear 
Crosscultural Language and Academic Development Certificate (certificate). The 
certificate does not expire. 
First Amended Accusation 
6. On May 9, 2024, complainant, in her official capacity, signed and 
thereafter filed an Accusation seeking to revoke all of respondent’s credentials,
certificates, and authorizations. The Accusation alleges cause for discipline based on
unprofessional conduct, immoral conduct, evident unfitness for service, and acts 
involving moral turpitude, pursuant to Education Code sections 44421 and 44345, 
subdivision (e). (All statutory references are to the Education Code unless otherwise 
stated.) 3 Generally, complainant alleges that respondent was convicted in December 
2022 of possession of cannabis on school grounds. Complainant also alleges that he
provided cannabis to a former student who was then an adult. In aggravation, 
complainant alleges respondent’s conduct involved bad faith, dishonesty, or other 
violation of the laws governing educators and significantly harmed a child entrusted to 
his care, the public, or the educational system.
7. At hearing, complainant moved to amend paragraph 12 in the 
Accusation to correct the criminal case number indicted from “22CR1697” to 
“22CR1657.” Respondent did not object, and the ALJ granted the motion. As amended, 
the pleading shall be considered and hereinto referred as the First Amended 
Accusation (FAA). 
8. Respondent timely filed a Notice of Defense to the original Accusation 
and requested a hearing. Respondent’s Notice of Defense was deemed responsive to 
the FAA. (Gov. Code, § 11506, subd. (c).) The matter was set for an evidentiary hearing 
before an ALJ of the OAH pursuant to section 44246 and Government Code section 
11500 et seq. 
Criminal Conviction and Misconduct
9. On December 2, 2022, in El Dorado County Superior Court, Case No. 
22CR1657, respondent was convicted on a no contest plea of violating Health and 
Safety Code section 11357, subdivision (c)(1), possession of not more than 28.5 grams 
of cannabis on school grounds, a misdemeanor. The court stayed imposition of 
sentence and placed respondent on one year of summary probation. The terms and 
conditions of probation required respondent to serve community service hours and 
pay fines, fees, and restitution. The circumstances underlying his conviction occurred 4 on a date between December 2021 and February 2022. On that unspecified date, 
respondent possessed not more than 28.5 grams of cannabis in his vehicle, which was 
parked on school grounds. 
10. In December 2023, in a meeting with the Commission’s Committee of 
Credentials, respondent admitted that on the unspecified date he possessed cannabis 
in his vehicle on school grounds, he offered and provided cannabis to a former 
student, who was by then an adult (Jane Doe). 
Respondent’s Evidence
11. Respondent testified. He has been teaching for over 30 years. He was 
inspired to become an educator by his mother and aunt, both of whom were also 
teachers. Respondent loves teaching and has dedicated his career to educating 
students. He intends to retire in May 2025.
12. Since 2016, respondent has been teaching math at Independence High 
School (IHS), a continuation high school in the El Dorado Union High School District 
(EDUHSD). Respondent taught at IHS years before and returned in 2016 after teaching 
elsewhere. As a continuation school, the student population at IHS comprise those 
who are at-risk of failing to graduate from high school. Respondent finds it rewarding 
to serve this student population, especially because he himself graduated from IHS. 
13. Respondent admitted his misconduct. He was a teacher at IHS when he 
possessed the cannabis in his vehicle that was parked on school grounds and offered 
cannabis to Jane Doe. Respondent explained he had forgotten about the cannabis in 
his vehicle, and he did not intend to bring it to school. Respondent also explained, 
when he and Jane Doe saw each other in the parking lot after school, they began 
chatting. During their conversation, the topic of cannabis arose, which reminded 5 respondent he had cannabis in his vehicle. At hearing, respondent admitted he did not 
think critically before offering Jane Doe the cannabis. He later learned Jane Doe shared 
the cannabis with her younger sister, who was then a current student at IHS. 
14. Respondent was forthcoming about his misconduct with IHS and 
EDUHSD. He explained to them the poor choices he made which resulted in his 
misconduct and conviction. In January 2023, EDUHSD assistant superintendent Tony 
Deville determined a letter of reprimand sufficiently addressed respondent’s 
misconduct. He continued to teach at IHS without interruption. 
15. Respondent acknowledged his wrongdoing and expressed remorse for 
his actions. Although respondent had no control over Jane Doe’s actions after he 
shared the cannabis with her, he expressed remorse that “an incredibly stupid thing 
that [he] did” resulted in a current student’s access to cannabis. Respondent is 
embarrassed and ashamed of his misconduct and poor judgment. He worries his 
reputation with students or other teachers has suffered due to his “stupid” decisions. 
However, he contends his poor judgment in this instance is not representative of his 
character, given his otherwise unblemished teaching career of over 30 years. 
Respondent has not engaged in similar misconduct prior or subsequent to the incident 
at issue. 
Analysis 
16. In (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, the California 
Supreme Court concluded that a teaching credential cannot be disciplined for 
unprofessional conduct, immoral conduct, or conduct involving moral turpitude 
“unless that conduct indicates that the [teacher] is unfit to teach.” (  at p. 229.) The 
Court outlined factors to consider when determining whether a teacher’s conduct 6 demonstrates unfitness to teach. These factors have been codified in California Code 
of Regulations, title 5, section 80302, subdivision (a): 
(1) the likelihood that the conduct may have adversely 
affected students or fellow teachers, and the degree of such 
adversity anticipated; 
(2) the proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct; 
(3) the types of credentials held or sought by the person 
involved; 
(4) any extenuating or aggravating circumstances 
surrounding the conduct; 
(5) the praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives 
resulting in the conduct; 
(6) the likelihood of recurrence of the questioned conduct; 
(7) the extent to which disciplinary action may have an 
adverse impact or chilling effect upon the constitutional 
rights of the person involved, or other teachers; and 
(8) the publicity or notoriety given to the conduct. 
LIKELIHOOD OF ADVERSE EFFECTS ON STUDENTS OR FELLOW TEACHERS
17. Beyond providing substantive instruction, a teacher also serves as a role 
model, whose words and actions are likely to be followed by students who are still 
learning their roles in the community and how to conduct themselves appropriately.7 To that end, respondent's conduct or reputation should not interfere with his ability, or 
the community’s confidence in his ability, to serve as a role model or earn his students’ 
respect. (  (2011) 
194 Cal.App.4th 1454, 1463-1464; (2010) 
184 Cal.App.4th 462, 477.) 
18. Here, although respondent’s sharing of the cannabis with Jane Doe 
resulted in a current student’s access, there is no evidence respondent's misconduct 
and conviction was well-known or publicized among the student body or other 
teachers at IHS. Relatedly, there is also no evidence respondent's misconduct and 
conviction or reputation interfered with his ability, or the community's confidence in 
his ability, to serve as a role model for his students. To the contrary, EDUHSD 
continued to entrust the education of its students to respondent. Nevertheless, there 
is a likelihood of adverse effects on students and fellow teachers because respondent’s 
conduct bears on his credibility as an educator and role model. 
PROXIMITY OR REMOTENESS IN TIME
19. Respondent’s conduct occurred in 2019. It is relatively remote in time, in 
light of respondent’s overall character and otherwise discipline-free teaching history. 
(See (1979) 90 Cal.App.3d 737, 747.) 
TYPES OF CREDENTIALS HELD
20. Respondent holds a Clear Multiple Subject Teaching Credential and a 
Clear Crosscultural Language and Academic Development Certificate. His credential 
and certificate require teaching competence. Further, respondent’s credential allows 
him to teach 12th grade and below, including preschool and in classes organized 
primarily for adults. With his credential, he may interact with students of all ages, for 8 whom he has to model appropriate behavior and good judgment. Therefore, his ability 
to engage in professional conduct and model appropriate behavior to students of 
varying ages, experiences, and learning abilities is important in light of his credential.
EXTENUATING OR AGGRAVATING CIRCUMSTANCES
21. Neither the Education Code nor the applicable regulations specify what 
constitutes “extenuating circumstances.” However, California Code of Regulations, 
title 5, section 80300, subdivision (m), defines “mitigating factor” as “an event or 
circumstance which demonstrates that the public, school children and the profession 
would be adequately protected by a more lenient degree of adverse action or no 
adverse action whatsoever.”
22. Respondent's licensure and criminal history is a mitigating factor. In over 
30 years of teaching, this is the first time respondent has been disciplined. This is also 
the only conviction in respondent's criminal record. Respondent's poor judgment, 
misconduct, and conviction appear to be an aberration in an otherwise upstanding 
teaching career and law-abiding life. 
23. The circumstances surrounding respondent's misconduct are also 
mitigating to an extent. Respondent's testimony regarding the circumstances was 
credible due to his demeanor and honesty. (Evid. Code, § 780.) Respondent admitted 
the cannabis he shared with Jane Doe was eventually accessed by a current student. 
Although this detail was not alleged by complainant in the FAA, and although it 
reflected poorly on him, respondent volunteered the information and was forthcoming 
in doing so. As a result, his testimony is given great weight.
24. Regarding the circumstances surrounding his misconduct, respondent 
explained he forgot about the cannabis in his vehicle on that unspecified date. He did 9 not deliberately bring the cannabis to school grounds. Because the cannabis remained 
in the vehicle and was not inside the classroom, no students had ready access to it. 
Respondent's lack of bad faith and the location of the cannabis on school grounds are 
mitigating. However, their mitigating value is diminished to an extent by respondent's 
subsequent actions. When, while chatting with Jane Doe in the school parking lot, he 
recalled the cannabis in his vehicle, respondent decided to bring the cannabis out in 
the open to share it with Jane Doe. 
25. Nevertheless, it is mitigating that respondent's decision to share the 
cannabis appears to be a lapse in judgment when he failed to think critically about the 
potential ramifications. Respondent's misconduct, although serious, did not stem from 
bad faith or a desire to cause harm to students. Further mitigating is respondent's 
remorse and his candor about his wrongdoing and shame. 
26. California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80300, subdivision (b), lists 
aggravating factors, the presence of which indicate a greater degree of discipline is 
necessary to protect students and the teaching profession. Complainant alleges the 
following aggravating factors: (1) misconduct surrounded or followed by bad faith, 
dishonesty, or other violation of the laws governing educators; and (2) significant harm 
to a child entrusted to the care of a credential holder, the public, or the educational 
system. ( at subds. (b)(2), & (4).) However, complainant did not produce evidence of 
either factor. 
PRAISEWORTHINESS OR BLAMEWORTHINESS OF MOTIVES RESULTING IN 
MISCONDUCT  
27. Respondent’s conduct is blameworthy. He committed a crime relating to 
possession of a controlled substance specifically on school grounds. Moreover, he 10 offered and provided the controlled substance to Jane Doe while on school grounds. 
Respondent’s failure to think critically and his lapse in judgment resulted in a current 
student’s access to cannabis.
LIKELIHOOD OF RECURRENCE
28. The likelihood of recurrence is minimal. Respondent’s misconduct is an 
isolated incident in over three decades of teaching, and his conviction is the only one 
in his record. He was remorseful and forthcoming about his misconduct, conviction, 
and poor judgment. He testified credibly that similar conduct will not recur. 
ADVERSE IMPACT OR CHILLING EFFECT 
29. There is no evidence discipline would adversely impact or chill 
respondent or any other teacher in the free exercise of their constitutional rights.
PUBLICITY OR NOTORIETY OF MISCONDUCT  
30. Although respondent worries about his reputation, there is no evidence 
his conduct was publicized or notorious. 
CONCLUSION  
31. Respondent's possession of not more than 28.5 grams of cannabis on 
school grounds and providing cannabis to Jane Doe while on school grounds comprise 
conduct that was unprofessional and unbecoming of a teacher. However, respondent's 
conduct does not rise to the level of immorality. His actions were not based on 
dishonesty. Respondent's credible explanation for his conduct and subsequent 
remorse and concern for his reputation are inconsistent with the willful, shameless, 
and moral indifference to respectable public opinion that marks immoral conduct. 11 32. Relatedly, respondent's conduct does not rise to the level of moral 
turpitude. Violating Health and Safety Code section 11357, subdivision (c)(1), is not 
specifically a crime of moral turpitude. Even so, respondent's crime was not based on 
dishonesty, a lack of modesty, or a lack of good morals. Instead, respondent failed to 
think critically and to exercise good judgment. 
33. Although respondent’s explanation for his conduct does not rise to the 
level of a legal excuse for his crime, it bears on the Commission's mandate to protect 
the public. The reasons for respondent's misconduct and crime do not indicate an 
evident unfitness to teach. There is no evidence showing respondent is unsuitable to 
teach due to a defect in his temperament or to an irremediable character trait. To the 
contrary, the evidence demonstrates respondent's misconduct and crime are outliers 
in his otherwise law-abiding life and career. He expressed remorse and has not 
engaged in similar misconduct. Relatedly, EDUHSD believes in respondent's fitness to 
teach as it has continued to entrust the education of its students to him. The evidence 
does not establish respondent is unable to safely practice as an educator. 
34. When all the evidence is considered in light of the factors, 
respondent has demonstrated he can perform his duties as a teacher in a manner 
consistent with the protection of the public, students, and the profession. In light of 
his unprofessional conduct, the Commission may privately admonish, publicly reprove, 
revoke, or suspend his teaching credential. Here, in weighing the evidence, a more 
lenient degree of discipline would adequately protect the public, and a public reproval 
is appropriate. A public reproval would serve the interests of public protection by
constituting prior discipline that can be considered in the event respondent engages 
in future misconduct. Furthermore, a public reproval balances the Commission’s 12 interest in regulating its licensees in consideration of the mitigating factors. Thus, 
respondent should be publicly reproved. 
LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 
Burden and Standard of Proof 
1. Complainant has the burden of proving the allegations in the Accusation 
by clear and convincing evidence to a reasonable certainty. (
(1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035.) Clear and convincing evidence 
requires proof that is so clear as to leave no substantial doubt and that is sufficiently 
strong to command the unhesitating assent of every reasonable mind. (
(2008) 169 Cal.App.4th 176, 190.) 
Applicable Law 
2. Pursuant to the Education Code, commencing with section 44000, and 
California Code of Regulations, title 5, commencing with section 80000, the 
Commission is responsible for credentialing teachers in public schools in California, 
including taking adverse action against applicants and credential holders. 
3. The Commission may privately admonish, publicly reprove, revoke, or 
suspend a credential for immoral or unprofessional conduct, evident unfitness of 
service, or any cause that would warrant denial of an application, such as an act 
involving moral turpitude. (Ed. Code, §§ 44345, subd. (e), & 44421.)
4. The California Supreme Court has recognized that the terms ”immoral 
conduct” and ”unprofessional conduct” substantially overlap one another and conduct 
that constitutes one often includes the other. ( , , 1 Cal.3d 214, 221, 13 fn. 9.) ”Unprofessional conduct” includes “that which violates the rules of ethical code 
of a profession or such conduct which is unbecoming a member of a profession in 
good standing.” (  (1953) 41 Cal.2d 
546, 553, internal quotations omitted.) Additionally, in 
, , 194 Cal.App.4th at page 
1466, the court explained: 
[T]he definition of immoral or unprofessional conduct must 
be considered in conjunction with the unique position of 
public school teachers, upon whom are imposed 
”responsibilities and limitations on freedom of action which 
do not exist in regard to other callings.” [Citation.] 
5. Immoral conduct is sometimes considered as synonymous with 
“dishonesty” or a high degree of unfairness. (
 (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811.) The court explained in 
 (1970) 9 Cal.App.3d 967, 972: 
The term “immoral” has been defined as that which is 
hostile to the welfare of the general public and contrary to 
good morals. Immorality includes conduct inconsistent with 
rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, 
dissoluteness; or as willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct 
showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable 
members of the community, and as an inconsiderate 
attitude toward good order and the public welfare. 14 6. Moral turpitude has been defined as ”everything done contrary to justice, 
honesty, modesty[,] or good morals.” (  (1979) 89 
Cal.App.3d 30, 36.) It includes any crime or misconduct committed without excuse or 
any dishonest act not necessarily a crime. (See (1979) 98 Cal.App.3d 167, 
181.)
7. A teacher’s fitness to teach is determined by considering their future 
classroom performance and overall impact on students. ( , , 1 Cal.3d at 
p. 229.) A charge of “evident unfitness for service” requires proof that the teacher is 
“clearly not fit, not adapted to[,] or unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of 
temperamental defects or inadequacies. [It] connotes a fixed character trait, 
presumably not remediable merely on receipt of notice that one’s conduct fails to 
meet the expectations of the employing school district.” (
(1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444.) 
When considering such a charge, the factors “must be analyzed to 
determine, as a threshold matter, whether the cited conduct indicates unfitness for 
service.” ( ., at p. 1445.) Only if the conduct demonstrates an unfitness for service 
does one proceed to the next step of determining “whether the ‘unfitness’ is ‘evident’; 
i.e., whether the offensive conduct is caused by a defect in temperament.” ( .)
Causes for Discipline 
8. Complainant established, by clear and convincing evidence, respondent 
engaged in unprofessional conduct by possessing not more than 28.5 grams of 
cannabis on school grounds, resulting in his December 2022 conviction for violating 
Health and Safety Code section 11357, subdivision (c)(1). Complainant also 
established, by clear and convincing evidence, respondent engaged in unprofessional 
conduct by providing cannabis to Jane Doe while on school grounds. Thus, cause 15 exists to discipline respondent’s credentials based on his unprofessional conduct, 
pursuant to section 44421. 
9. Complainant failed to establish, by clear and convincing evidence, 
respondent demonstrated an evident unfitness for service by possessing not more 
than 28.5 grams of cannabis on school grounds or providing cannabis to Jane Doe 
while on school grounds. Thus, cause does not exist to discipline respondent’s 
credentials on the basis of an evident unfitness for service, pursuant to section 44421. 
10. Complainant failed to establish, by clear and convincing evidence, 
respondent engaged in immoral conduct by possessing not more than 28.5 grams of 
cannabis on school grounds or providing cannabis to Jane Doe while on school 
grounds. Thus, cause does not exist to discipline respondent’s credentials on the basis 
of immoral conduct, pursuant to section 44421. 
11. Complainant failed to establish, by clear and convincing evidence, 
respondent committed acts involving moral turpitude by possessing not more than 
28.5 grams of cannabis on school grounds or providing cannabis to Jane Doe while on 
school grounds. Thus, cause does not exist to discipline respondent’s credentials on 
the basis of acts of moral turpitude, pursuant to sections 44421 and 44345, subdivision 
(e). 
Appropriate Discipline 
12. Discipline for unprofessional conduct can consist of private 
admonishment, public reproval, suspension of the credential, or revocation of the 
credential. (Ed. Code, § 44421.) As discussed above, when all the evidence is 
considered, a public reproval of respondent would adequately protect the public, 
students, and the profession.16ORDER
Respondent Jeffrey Collins Scott is PUBLICLY REPROVED.
DATE: December 9, 2024
PATRICE DE GUZMAN HUBER
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings
