BEFORE THE  
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING  
STATE OF CALIFORNIA  
In the Matter of  the Accusation Against : 
SHIRLEY LOUISE GALE,  Respondent  
Agency Case No. 2 -407218474  
OAH Case No. 2024070667  
PROPOSED DECISION  
Wim van Rooyen , Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings 
(OAH), State of California, heard this matter on January 14 and 15, 2025 , from 
Sacramento, California.  
Brent O. Jex , Deputy Attorney General, represented complainant Mary Vixie 
Sandy, Ed.D., Executive Director of the California Commission on Teacher Credentialing 
(Commission).  
Andrea Price, Attorney at Law, represented respondent Shirley Louise Gale.  
Evidence was received, the record closed, and the matter submitted for decision 
on January 15, 2025.  
On February 10, 2025,  the record was reopened  until March 13, 2025,  to allow 
the parties to submit supplemental briefs  concerning  the potential imposition of 
probation conditions. On March 11, 2025, respondent submitted her supplemental 2 brief , marked as E xhibit W . On March 12, 2025,  complainant  submitted a letter, 
indicating that she  declined to file  any supplemental brief , marked as Exhibit 20.  
On March 13, 2025 , Exhibits 20 and W were admitted as argument , the record 
was closed, and the matter was resubmitted for decision.  
FACTUAL FINDINGS  
Jurisdictional Matters  
1. Respondent holds or has held multiple credentials and certificates from 
the Commission (collectively, “Teaching Credentials”).  
Specifically,  on January 10, 2001, the Commission issued respondent an 
Emergency 30- Day Substitute Permit, which expired on February 1, 2003, was reissued 
on July 29, 2003, and again expired on August 1, 2004.  
On May 13, 2004, the Commission issued respondent a Preliminary Multiple 
Subject Teaching Credential , which expired on June 1, 2009.  
On January 18, 2009, the Commission issued respondent a Level I Education 
Specialist Instruction Credential , which expired on February 1, 2014.  
On May 21, 2009, the Commission issued respondent a Clear Multiple Subject 
Teaching Credential , which will expire on August 1, 2029, unless renewed.  
On October 1, 2013, the Commission issued respondent a Clear Education 
Specialist Instruction Credential , which will expire on October 1, 2028, unless renewed.  3 2. On December 13 through 15, 2023, the Commission’s Committee of 
Credentials  determined probable cause existed to take adverse action against 
respondent’s Teaching Credentials  based on allegations of repeated unnecessary 
physical contact with students and other unprofessional conduct  during the 2021 -2022 
school year . Respondent timely requested an administrative hearing.  
3. On May 9, 2024, complainant, in her official capacity, signed an 
Accusation seeking to discipline respondent’s Teaching Credentials  based on  
unprofessional conduct, evident unfitness for service, immoral conduct, and acts of 
moral turpitude. The Accusation further alleged  matters in aggravation, including that 
respondent had previously  resigned  her employment at the Sutter County 
Superintendent of Schools Office (Sutter County)  while allegations of misconduct were 
pending for using inappropriate physical fo rce with students.  Respondent filed a 
Notice of Defense to the Accusation. This hearing followed.  
Incidents During the 2021- 2022 School Year  
4. During the 2021-2022 school year, respondent was employed as a special 
education teacher by the Washington Unified School District (District) at Riverbank 
Elementary School  (RES)  in West Sacramento, California.  She taught a specialized day 
class of students in grades  three through five, ages 8 to 10 years old.  At hearing, 
complainant offered documentary evidenc e; the testimony of two  experienced  
paraeducators who worked in respondent’s classroom , Michaela Taylor and Katelyn 
Pratt;  and the testimony of RES’s principal , Kristen Rodriguez, concerning several 4 incidents involving RES students. The following incidents were established by  clear and 
convincing evidence .1 
5. On multiple occasions from August through October 2021, respondent 
made derogatory comments about student C2 in front of other students. Those 
included statements like: “ it’s going to be a great day, [student C] isn’t here today, 
woo!”  
6. Student B had a history of eloping. At the end of August or beginning of 
September 2021, student B eloped from respondent’s classroom and was missing for 
approximately 10 minutes. When Ms. Taylor asked respondent whether she had called 
student B  in as missing through the school’s walkie -talkie system, respondent stated 
that she was too embarrassed to report student B missing.  
7. In September 2021, respondent knew that student J 2 wore headphones 
as part of his Individual Education Plan  (IEP), with a goal for student J2 to withstand 10 
minutes of the day without headphones. On one occasion in September 2021, 
respondent tried to take student J2’s headphones off his head. When respondent was 
unable to do so, she forcibly removed student J2’s headphones in a “ tug-of-war 
fashion, ” causing student J2 to become visibly upset.  
 
1 The remaining allegations in the Accusation were not established by clear and 
convincing evidence.  
2 The decision refers to students by alphabet designation to protect their 
privacy and confidentiality.  5 8. On October 18, 2021, respondent was at a table working with students. 
Student H was  supposed to be writing but was off task. Respondent grabbed student 
H’s hand in a technique calle d “hand -over -hand ” to redirect her, but student H cried 
out, “Ouch!” and  “Teacher! Teacher!”  
9. On October 18, 2021, student I was staring away from her work. 
Respondent redirected student I’s gaze to student I’s work by using respondent’s hand 
to move student I’s head down to the table.  
10. On October 25, 2021, student J1 was off task and had moved away from 
his work and was standing away from his desk in the classroom. Respondent grabbed 
J1 and brought him back to a table where respondent was working with other 
students. Respondent held J1 to his seat and then turned her back on him. J1 hit 
respondent’s arm, and respondent turned around and grabbed J1 and yelled in his 
face. Respondent turned her back on J1, and when he hit respondent’s arm again, 
respondent turned around, grabbed J1 by his arms, and yelled at him again. Multiple 
staff members reported bruising on J1’s arms . 
11. Ms. Rodriguez had been a teacher for eight years and served as an 
administrator for 19 years before she became the principal at RES.  Based on her 
professional experience, she opined that respondent’s interactions  with vulnerable 
special needs students likely made them uncomfortable, caused them distress, caused 
their behaviors to escalate, and created an element of fear and mistrust in the 
classroom.  
12. On October 26, 2021, the District placed respondent on paid 
administrative leave. In April 2022, she returned to working at the District as a long-6 term substitute teacher at another school. She then resigned her position at the 
District , effective June 2, 2022.  
Matters in Aggravation  
13. Around 2012,  respondent resigned her employment at Sutter County 
while allegations of misconduct were pending for using inappropriate physical force 
with students.  Once notified, the Commission investigated . In a November 7, 2013 
letter to the Commission, respondent indicated that she had been diagnosed with 
bipolar disorder, which caused some of the issues at work. However, she had since 
been successfully treated through medication management by a psychiatrist and counseling , and she had achieved stability  and wellness.  The Commission ultimately 
closed its case and did not impose any discipline.  
Respondent’s Evidence  
14. Respondent testified at hearing. She also offered the testimony of third -
party  witnesses and extensive documentary evidence , including letters of support and 
a fitness for duty evaluation.  
RESPONDENT ’S TESTIMONY  
15. Respondent became a teacher because she loves teaching children. She 
enjoys the challenge and the process of getting children to “aha  moments.”  
16. Respondent acknowledged her resignation from Sutter County around 
2012. At the time, she was diagnosed with bipolar disorder II and severe depression  by 
Richard Sanchez, M.D., a psychiatrist . Once she started medication and counseling, her 
symptoms improved,  and she stabilized. She was able to resume teaching without any 
issues.  Respondent  continued her treatment with Dr. Sanchez until 2015 when he was 7 no longer covered by her insurance. However, her primary care nurse practitioner (NP) 
continued to prescribe respondent  her medications.  
17. In July 2021, respondent’s symptoms returned. She experienced mood 
swings and severe depression, anxiety, and a general feeling of being overwhelmed. 
She became moody and reactive, short -tempered, and very easily frustrated.  
18. In August 2021, respondent saw her primary care NP and reported her 
symptoms. The NP told her to just watch her symptoms to make sure they did not get 
worse.  
19. Respondent’s symptoms increased during the school year. She became 
more and more stressed in the classroom and felt completely overwhelmed.  Some of 
the students in her classroom had violent behaviors, which she found especially 
triggering.  She also felt that some of the paraeducators did not like her, would huddle 
in groups and talk about her, and would not comply with her instructions about when to take breaks. In hindsight, respondent  should have taken a leave of absence. 
However, she was not thinking clearly at the time because she was constantly in “fight 
or flight” mode.  
20. Respondent acknowledged making disparaging remarks about student C 
to the paraeducators while outside waiting for the children to get off the school bus.  
Student C’s behaviors were “really big and constant ,” constantly requiring redirection 
or intervention.  It was always a high-stress day when  he was at school.  Respondent  
does not believe other  children could hear  her remarks . Nonetheless, she strongly 
regrets making those inappropriate comments. She would never do that today.  
21. Respondent recalls the incident when student B eloped. At the time, she 
thought that one of the paraeducators had taken him to the toilet. When she learned 8 that he was missing, she asked the paraeducators to go looking for him. Today, she 
would immediately call the school office as well.  
22. Respondent recalls removing student J2’s headphones  against his will, 
making him very upset  and agitated. She did so to comply with his IEP ; not to punish 
or upset him. However,  she believes she could have been gentler and more patient 
with student J2. She would handle the situation differently today.  
23. Respondent admits the incident with student H. Student H had refused 
to do her work, and respondent had unsuccessfully given her several verbal prompts.  
Respondent then decided to use the “ hand -over -hand ” method. Respondent did not 
squeeze student H’s hand, but student H did say, “Ouch teacher .” Upon hearing that, 
respondent immediately released student H’s hand.  Respondent was not attempting to 
punish or discipline student H; she was attempting to redirect her. Today, respondent 
would no longer use the “hand -over-hand” method. She would give the student more 
time, take a break,  or attempt to use physical  reinforcers like candy or toys.  
24. Respondent admits the incident with student I.  Respondent put her 
hands on either side of student I’s head and directed it down towards the table. 
Student I’s head never touched the table. Respondent did not do this to punish or 
discipline student I, but merely to redirect her to her work. Today, respondent would 
never put her hands on a student. Instead, she would instruct the student to “follow 
my hand or follow my eyes.”  
25. Respondent also acknowledges the incident with student J1. Student J1 
had repeatedly hit respondent despite several admonitions to stop hitting. Respondent became very agitated. She does not recall putting her hands on student J1 
but does not deny it. She thinks she has no memory of it because she was in such an 9 “escalated state.” No one showed her the bruises on student J1 that day. When she 
subsequently learned of the bruising,  she was shocked and horrified. Today, she would 
handle the situation very differently.  She would follow his behavior plan, give him 
more time to comply, and/or ask other staff for assistance.  
26. When the District placed respondent on paid administrative leave, she 
looked for a psychiatrist and eventually found an emergency appointment with Jehan 
F. Helmi, M.D. Dr. Helmi concluded that respondent’s previous medications were no 
longer working, placed her on medical leave, and titrated down the previous 
medications. He then trialed her on new medications until they found medications that 
were effective. Respondent again stabilized and returned to work at the District in 
April 2022. There were no compl aints about her work performance until she resigned 
her position with the District in June 2022.  
27. When Dr. Helmi left the practice, respondent started treatment with  
psychiatric NP Nnaemeka Anosike on August 9, 2022. He sees her every two to three 
months and manages her medications. Respondent also  receives counseling from 
Mark Stel zner, LMFT.3 Respondent is stable and doing very well on her treatment 
regimen. She also has a great support system in her husband , family, and good friends.  
28. Respondent now vigilantly monitors her mental state. If symptoms were 
to recur, she would immediately seek treatment and take a leave of absence if 
necessary.  
29. For the 2022 -2023 school year, respondent taught a transitional 
kindergarten class for children with autism at the Twin Rivers Unified School District.  
 
3 LMFT is an abbreviation for Licensed Marriage and Family Therapist.  10 She described it as “the hardest class I ever taught.” The children had severe issues 
with lots of problematic behavior. She also had inadequate staff support. Nevertheless, 
she successfully finished the school year without issues.  
30. Since the fall of 2023, respondent has been teaching a special education 
class of seventh and eighth graders at Douglas Middle School in  the Woodland Joint 
Unified School District (WJUSD). The students are challenging, but respondent enjoys 
the work.  Some of her students can be assaultive, but she now gives them space and 
time, sensory breaks, and lots of positive reinforcement.  She works gently with them 
and gives them a lot of one -on-one time. She has never had to restrain a student.  
31. Respondent has never been the subject of any complaints or work 
discipline at WJUSD. She offered  2023 and 2024 performance evaluations, including 
multiple teaching observations by the vice principal, that show she meets or exceeds 
expectations.  The most recent evaluation was in December 2024.  
32. Respondent hopes to continue teaching her current class for the 
foreseeable future.  She is passionate about teaching and strongly desires to retain her 
Teaching Credentials . She is willing to comply with any probationary conditions or 
restrictions the Commission deems appropriate.  
THIRD PARTY WITNESS TESTIMONY AND LETTERS OF SUPPORT  
33. Mr. Anosike testified at hearing. He has been respondent’s treating 
psychiatric provider for the past two to three years. He sees her every two to three 
months, she takes her medications as prescribed, and she is currently stable and doing 
well on her treatment regimen.  11 34. Mr. Stelzner testified at hearing. He has been respondent’s counselor 
since August 2022. He began seeing her on a weekly basis because she needed 
significant support in navigating her bipolar disorder, depression, and anxiety. 
However, she has stabilized on her medications and made significant progress in 
coping with stress and anxiety during counseling. In October 2023, they mutually 
agreed to reduce counseling sessions to every other week. She consistently attends her appointments. Mr. Stelzner has no  current concerns about respondent’s fitness to 
teach.  
35. Carol Cantrell and Laura Brickner, both experienced paraeducators with 
the WJUSD who currently work with respondent, wrote letters in support of 
respondent and testified at hearing . Both witnesses described respondent as a 
competent teacher who  is knowledgeable,  follows the students’ IEPs and behavior 
plans , and is attentive to the students’ needs . The witnesses  have never seen her  
physically restrain a student, lose her temper with students,  get overwhelmed or 
unduly frustrated,  yell at students, or otherwise  engage inappropriately with students . 
Respondent is well liked by both students and staff.  They have no concerns about her 
fitness to teach.  
36. Respondent offered letters of support from three friends –  Chayney 
Pascua, Kimberley McLaughlin, and Kim Miller -Aitkens. The authors are aware of the 
pending Accusation but nonetheless attest to respondent’s kindness, compassion, 
selflessness, and dedication to teaching.  
FITNESS FOR DUTY EVALUATION  
37. As part of the  investigation preceding the Accusation, respondent was 
required to undergo a psychiatric examination by Jessica Ferranti, M.D. Dr. Ferranti 12 evaluated respondent on September 29, 2023, and prepared an evaluation report 
dated October 23, 2023.  Dr. Ferranti concluded that respondent was fit to perform the 
duties of her Teaching Credentials.  
LEGAL CONCLUSIONS  
Burden and Standard of Proof  
1. Complainant bears the burden of proving the existence of grounds for 
disciplining respondent’s credentials by clear and convincing evide nce to a reasonable 
certainty. (Daniels v. Dept . of Motor Vehicles  (1983) 33 Cal.3d 532, 536 [“When an 
administrative agency initiates an action to suspend or revoke a license, the burden of 
proving the facts necessary to support the action rests with the agency making the 
allegation .”]; Gardener  v. Comm ’n on Professional Competence  (1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 
1036, 1039-1040 [recognizing that the clear and convincing evidence standard applies 
to proceedings to discipline a teacher’s credential, whereas the lesser preponderance of the evidence standard applies to proceedings to dismiss a teacher  from particular 
employment].) “ The courts have defined clear and convincing evidence as evidence 
which is so clear as to leave no substantial doubt and as sufficiently strong to 
command the unhesitating as sent of every reasonable mind. [Citations.]  It has been 
said that a preponderance calls for pro bability, while clear and convincing proof 
demands a 
high probability  [citations].” (In re Terry D.  (1978) 83 Cal.App.3d 890, 899; 
italics original. ) 13 Cause for Discipline  
2. The Accusation seeks to discipline respondent’s Teaching Credentials 
based on unprofessional conduct, evident unfitness for service, immoral conduct, and 
acts of moral turpitude.  Each cause is addressed separately below.  
UNPROFESSIONAL CONDUCT  
3. The Commission may discipline a credential for unprofessional conduct. 
(Ed. Code, § 44421.)  The term “unprofessional conduct” is not defined by the Education 
Code. Nevertheless, the California Supreme Court has held the term may be construed 
consistent with common usage as conduct that “violates the rules or ethical code of a 
profession or such c onduct which is unbecoming a member of a profession in good 
standing.” ( Bd. of Education of the City of Los Angeles v. Swan (1953) 41 Cal.2d 546, 
553.)  
4. Complainant established by clear and convincing evidence that 
respondent made  derogatory comments about a student in front of other students; 
failed to timely report a student missing due to embarrassment ; forcibly remov ed a 
student’s headphones in a “tug-of -war fashion”;  grab bed a student’s hand to the 
extent it caused the student pain; redirect ed a student’s gaze to her work by using 
respondent’s  hand to move the student’s head down to the table; and yell ed at a 
student and grabb ed him by the arms , result ing in  bruising . Such actions violate the 
ethical rules of the teaching profession  and are unbecoming a teacher in good 
standing.  Thus, cause exists to discipline respondent’s Teaching Credentials for 
unprofessional conduct under Education Code section 44421.  14 EVIDENT UNFITNESS FOR SERVICE  
5. The Commission may discipline a credential for evident unfitness for 
service. (Ed. Code, § 44421.) The term “evident unfitness for service,” means “clearly 
not fit, not adapted to or unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of 
temperamental defects or inadequacies.” ( Woodland Joint Unified Sch. Dist. v. Com. on 
Professional Competence  (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444.) The term “connotes a fixed 
character trait, presumably not remediable merely on receipt of notice that one’s conduct fails to meet the e xpectations of the employing school district.” (
Ibid.) 
6. Here,  respondent’s behavior  during the 2021 -2022 school year  suggest s 
that she may have  temperamental defects or inadequacies rendering her unsuitable 
for teaching. However, these behaviors occurred during a period when her mental 
health was poor and uncontrolled by her medication. The weight of the evidence also 
shows that when her mental health is well controlled through medication and therapy, 
she is an excellent teacher.  In sum , complainant has not established by clear and 
convincing evidence  that respondent has an irremediable, fixed character trait 
rendering her unfit to teach. Thus, cause does not exist to discipline respondent for evident unfitness to teach under Education Code section 44421.  
IMMORAL CONDUCT  
7. The Commission may discipline a credential for immoral conduct. (Ed. 
Code, § 44421.) Immoral conduct is defined as conduct that:  
is hostile to the welfare of the general public and contrary to good morals. Immorality has not been confined to sexual 
matters, but includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or 
indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; 15 or as wil[l]ful, flagrant, or shameless conduct showing moral 
indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the 
community, and as an inconsiderate attitude toward good 
order and the public welfare.  
(Bd. of Ed. of San Francisco Unified Sch. Dist. v. Weiland  (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 
811; see also San Diego Unified Sch. Dist. v. Com. on Professional Competence  (2011) 
194 Cal.App.4th 1454, 1466.)  
8. Moreover, the definition of immoral conduct “must be considered in 
conjunction with the unique position of public school teachers, upon whom are imposed responsibilities and limitations on freedom of action which do not exist in regard to other callings.” (
San Diego Unified Sch. Dist. , supra , 194 Cal.App.4th at 
p. 1466.) A teacher is often described as “an exemplar, whose words and actions are 
likely to be followed by the children coming under [the teacher’s] care and protection.” (
Palo Verde Unified Sch. D ist. v. Hensey  (1970) 9 Cal.App.3d 967, 970.)  
9. Complainant established by clear and convincing evidence that 
respondent engaged in immoral conduct.  At a minimum, respondent’s yell ing at 
student J1 and grabb ing him by the arms, resulting in bruising , constitutes flagrant 
conduct that was harmful  to student J1, hostile to the welfare of the general public, 
and contrary to good morals. Thus, cause exists to discipline respondent for immoral conduct under Education Code 44421.  
ACTS OF MORAL TURPITUDE  
10. The Commission may discipline a credential for any cause that would 
have warranted denial of an application for a credential or renewal of that credential, 
including acts of moral turpitude. (Ed. Code, §§ 44345, subd. (e), & 44421 .) 16 11. “Moral turpitude is a concept that ‘defies exact description’ [citation] and 
‘cannot be defined with precision’ [citation].” ( In re Grant  (2014) 58 Cal.4th 469, 475-
476.) “Our Supreme Court has defined moral turpitude as ‘an act of baseness, vileness 
or depravity in the private and social duties which a man owes to his fellowmen, or to society in general, contrary to the accepted and custom ary rule of right and duty 
between man and man.’ [Citation.] Moral turpitude has also been described as any crime or misconduc t committed without excuse, or any ‘dishonest or immoral’ act not 
necessarily a crime. [Citation.] The definition depends on the state of public morals 
and may vary according to the community or the times, as well as on the degree of 
public harm produced b y the act in question. [Citation.]” (
Clerici v. Department of 
Motor Vehicles  (1990) 224 Cal.App.3d 1016, 1027; see also Ricasa v. Office of 
Administrative Hearings  (2018) 31 Cal.App.5th 262, 281; Golde v. Fox  (1979) 98 
Cal.App.3d 167, 185.) Moral turpitude  has also been described as the “‘general 
readiness to do evil.’ [Citation.]” ( Donley v. Davi  (2009) 180 Cal.App.4th 447, 458.)  
12. Complainant failed to establish by clear and convincing evidence that 
respondent engaged in acts of moral turpitude. To be sure, respondent’s  yelling at 
student J1 and grabbing him by the arms, resulting in bruising, constitutes  immoral 
conduct . However,  she did not  engage in such immoral conduct  out of baseness, 
vileness, or depravity, nor due to a general readiness to do evil.  The weight of the 
evidence shows that respondent’s  behavior resulted from her poor  mental health  at 
the time, which was uncontroll ed by her medication.  Although this does not excuse 
the immoral behavior, it does not meet the definition of an act of moral turpitude as 
outlined in the above case law.  Thus, cause does not exist to discipline respondent’s 
Teaching Credentials for acts of moral turpitude under Education Code sections 44345, 
subdivision (e), and 44421.  17 Propriety of Discipline Under  the Morrison  Factors 
13. Even when cause for di scipline  exists, complainant  must also 
demonstrate that discipline  is appropriate because there is a factual nexus between 
respondent’s misconduct and unfitness to teach. ( Morrison v. State Bd. of Education  
(1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 299.) In Morrison , the California Supreme Court provided a list of 
factors for assessing a person’s fitness to teach. The inquiry includes (1)  the likelihood 
the conduct may have adversely affected others and the degree of such adversity 
anticipated; (2)  the proximity or r emoteness in time of the conduct; (3)  the type of 
certification held by the party involved; (4) the extenuating or aggravating 
circumstances, if any, surrounding the conduct; (5)  the praiseworthiness or 
blameworthines s of the motives resulting in the conduct; (6)  the likelihood of the 
recurrence of the questioned conduct; and (7)  the extent to which disciplinary action 
may inflict an adverse impact or chilling effect upon the constitutional rights of the 
teacher involved or other teachers.  
14. “The [Morrison ] factors are not rules, but broad classes of issues to be 
considered to assist in determining whether to impose discipline. Only the relevant factors need to be analyzed.” (
Ricasa v. Office of Admin. Hearings (2018) 31 
Cal.App.5th 262, 285.) The factors may apply to all charges in the aggregate, 
considering the totality of offensive conduct. ( Woodland Joint Unified Sch. Dist. , supra , 
2 Cal.App.4th at pp.  1456 –1457 [“When a camel’s back is broken we need not weigh 
each straw in its load to see  which one could have done the deed.”].)  
LIKELIHOOD OF ADVERSE IMPACT AND DEGREE OF ADVERSITY  
15. As noted above, respondent made derogatory comments about a 
student in front of other students; failed to timely report a student missing due to 18 embarrassment; forcibly removed a student’s headphones in a “tug -of-war fashion”;  
grabbed a student’s hand to the extent it caused the student pain; redirected a 
student’s gaze to her work by using respondent’s hand to move the student’s head 
down to the table; and yelled at a student and grabbed him by the arms, resulting in 
bruising.  
16. Ms. Rodriguez credibly testified that respondent’s actions likely made th e 
students  uncomfortable, caused them distress, caused their behaviors to escalate, and 
created an element of fear and mistrust in the classroom.  Some of the students also 
suffered pain due to respondent’s i mproper physical contact.  Additionally, 
respondent’s  failure to timely report a student missing placed that student at risk of 
harm.  Thus, the likelihood of adverse impact and degree of adversity are high.  
PROXIMITY OR REMOTENESS IN TIME 
17. Respondent’s actions occurred in the 2021- 2022 school year. Thus, they 
are relatively recent.  
TYPE OF CERTIFICATION HELD 
18. Respondent holds multiple credentials. At the time of the events in 
question, she was working as a special education teacher.  Respondent’s actions  at the 
time demonstrated an  inability to self -regulate and exercise self- control , which is 
particularly troubling when teaching vulnerable special needs students.  
EXTENUATING OR AGGRAVATING CIRCUMSTANCES  
19. An extenuating factor is that respondent’s behavior was driven not by 
malice, but by her poor mental health during the 2021-2022 school year.  In hindsight , 
she acknowledges she should have taken a leave of absence.  19 20. An aggravating factor is that respondent in 2012 resigned her 
employment at Sutter County while allegations of misconduct were pending for using 
inappropriate physical force  with students.  Respondent admitted she was 
subsequently diagnosed with bipolar disorder , which caused her behavior and was 
then successfully treated with medication and counseling. Thus,  respondent was aware 
that she had a mental health condition that required monitoring.  
PRAISEWORTHINESS OR BLAMEWORTHINESS OF MOTIVES  
21. Respondent’s behavior in the 2021- 2022 school year was not motivated 
by any praiseworthy motives. The weight of the evidence shows that the behavior was 
caused by her poor mental health that was uncontrolled through medication.  
LIKELIHOOD OF RECURRENCE  
22. The conduct at issue in this case is the second instance where 
respondent  engaged in misconduct  at work attributable to her mental health 
condition. However, the first instance occurred before her initial diagnosis.  The second 
instance  at issue in this case  constituted a recurrence following poor medication 
control.  At hearing, respondent displayed good insight and credibly testified that she  
now vigilantly monitors her mental health.  She would immediately seek help and take 
a leave of absence if her mental health condition were to decline again in the future.  
Thus, the likelihood of recurrence is low.  
ADVERSE IMPACT OR CHILLING EFFECT UPON  CONSTITUTIONAL  RIGHTS  
23. The conduct at issue in this case does not involve the exercise of any 
constitutional rights.  20 CONCLUSION  
24. When all the Morrison factors are considered,  complainant demonstrated 
by clear and convincing evidence that there is a factual nexus between  respondent’s 
conduct in the aggregate  and unfitness to teach. Thus, the imposition of discipline is 
appropriate.  The only remaining question is the degree of discipline.  
Appropriate Degree of Discipline  
25. Under Education Code section 44421,  the disciplinary options are private 
admonishment, public reproval, suspension, or revocation. The purpose of licensing 
proceedings is not punishment, but to protect the public. ( Fahmy v. Medical Board of 
California  (1995) 38 Cal.App.4th 810, 817.)  
26. Cause exists to discipline respondent’s c redential s for the reasons 
explained above . However , revocation is unnecessary to protect the public interest . 
The psychiatrist appointed by complainant to examine respondent  concluded that 
respondent was fit to perform the duties of her Teaching Credentials.  Additionally , 
respondent’s psychiatric provider  and counselor  opined that respondent is  presently  
stable and doing well on her current treatment regimen. They have no concerns about 
her fitness to teach.  At hearing, respondent demonstrated good insight and credibly 
testified that she now vigilantly monitors her mental health.  If mental health  symptoms 
were to recur, she would immediately seek treatment and take a leave of absence if 
necessary. Respondent’s testimony is further supported by her  excellent pe rformance 
as a special education teacher in the WJUSD over the past couple of years.  
27. Given respondent’s present mental health and work performance, a 
suspension would not serve the public interest. A stayed revocation or suspension with 
imposition of p robation has been considered, but the Commissioner presently has no 21 disciplinary guidelines outlining specific probation conditions. Additionally, 
complainant declined to submit any supplemental briefing concerning plausible 
probation conditions.  
28. When the record as a whole is considered, the appropriate discipline is a 
public reproval. “ ’Public reproval ’ is a public warning from the Commission that 
conduct is not appropriate for a credential holder or applicant. Following a public 
reproval, commission of the same or similar misconduct may result in more serious 
advers e action. ” (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80300, subd. (p).)  Additionally, unlike a 
private admonishment, a public reproval puts potential employers and the public on notice of respondent’s past unprofessional conduct, which further serves the public 
protection  interest.  
ORDER  
Respondent Shirley Louise Gale and her Teaching Credentials (the  expired 
Emergency 30- Day Substitute Permit, expired Preliminary Multiple Subject Teaching 
Credential , expired Level I Education Specialist Instruction Credential , Clear Multiple 
Subject Teaching Credential , and Clear Education Specialist Instruction Credential ) are 
PUBLICALLY REPROVED.
DATE:  March 20, 2025  
WIM VAN ROOYEN  
Administrative Law Judge  
Office of Administrative Hearings  
 
