BEFORE THE  
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING  
STATE OF CALIFORNIA  
In the Matter of  the Accusation  Against : 
NANETTE MACHLEIT,  Respondent  
Agency Case No. 2 -476083810  
OAH No. 20240 90037  
PROPOSED DECISION  
Matthew S. Block , Administrative Law Judge  (ALJ), Office of Administrative 
Hearings (OAH), State of California, heard this matter on May 13 and 14 , 2025, in 
Sacramento , California . 
Seth A. Curtis , Deputy Attorney General, represented Mary Vixie Sandy 
(complainant), Executive Director of the California Commission on Teacher 
Credentialing (Commission).  
Matthew Chevedden , Attorney at Langenkamp, Curtis, Price, Lindstrom & 
Chevedden, represented Nanette Machleit  (respondent) , who was present . 
Evidence was received , the record closed , and the matter submitted for decision 
on May 14, 2025.  2 FACTUAL FINDINGS  
Jurisdiction al Matters  
1. On August 17, 2015, the Commission issued respondent a Clear 
Education Specialist Instruction Credential (Credential) . The Credential will expire on 
September 1, 2025, unless renewed. On July 8, 2015, the Commission issued 
respondent a Crosscultural, Language, and Academic Development Certificate 
(Certificate). The Certificate need not be renewed and will remain in force as long as 
the valid prerequisite credential is held concurrently.  
2. Respondent previously held the following credentials: (1) a Clear Multiple 
Subject Teaching Credential, which was issued on November 14, 2017, and expired on 
December 1, 2022; (2) a Level 1 Education Specialist Credential, which was issued on June 12, 2013 , and expired on July 1, 2018; (3) a Preliminary 5 -Year Multiple Subject 
Teaching Credential , which  was issued on May 30, 2013, and expired on June 1, 2018; 
(4) an Emergency Crosscultural, Language, and Academic Development Permit, which was issued on Sept ember 1, 2013, and expired on October 1, 2015; and (5) a Certificate 
of Clearance, which was issued on August 19, 2010, and expired on September 1, 2015.  
3. On July 24, 2024, complainant’s representative signed and thereafter filed 
an Accusation against respondent in her official capacity. The Accusation alleged cause to discipline respondent  for: (1) unprofessional conduct; (2) immoral conduct; (3) 
evident unfitness for service; and (4) acts of moral turpitude. More specifically, the 
Accusation alleged that on October 24, 2022, respondent twisted the skin of Student 
1’s arm, causing her to scream in pain. Additionally, the Accusation alleged th at on  a 
prior in cident, respondent slammed Student 1 into a chair when she was not following  
directions.  3 4. As factors in aggravation, complainant alleged: (1) respondent’s 
misconduct evidences multiple acts of wrongdoing and demonstrates a pattern of 
misconduct; (2) respondent’s misconduct was surrounded by or followed by bad faith, 
dishonesty, or other violation of the law governing educators; (3) respond ent’s 
misconduct significantly harmed a child trusted to her care, or significantly harmed the 
public or the educational system; and (4) respondent has demonstrated indifference 
toward the consequences of her m isconduct.  
5. Respondent timely filed a Notice of Defense to the Accusation. The 
matter was set for evidentiary hearing before an ALJ of the OAH, an independent 
adjudicative agency of the State of California, pursuant to Government Code section 
11500 et seq.  
Background  
6. The Pioneer Union School District (District) is a small school district in 
unincorporated El Dorado County. There are only two schools in the District: Pioneer 
Elementary School  (Pioneer)  and Mountain Creek Middle School , which are located 
adjacent to each other in Somerset, California.  
7. The District is governed by various policies. Policy No. 4119.21 provides 
that it is inappropriate for a District emplo yee to physically abuse, or willfully harm or 
injure a child. Policy No. 4119.24 prohibits adults from intruding on a student’s 
physical or emotional boundaries unless necessary in an emergency or to serve a 
legitimate purpose related to education or safety.  
8. At all relevant times, respondent worked for the District as a special 
education teacher servicing  both schools.  Each  District student receiving special 
education services  are also assigned to a general education classroom. Respondent’s 4 classroom was known as the Learning Center. Respondent and her instructional aides 
would periodically pull special education students from their general education 
classrooms and take them to the Learning Center for instruction. They would also 
“push in,” o r join the special education students in their general education classrooms, 
when needed for extra support.  
Student 1  
9. In 2022, Student 1 was a five -year-old moderate to severe special 
education student assigned to a general education kindergarten class  at Pioneer . 
Student 1 has been diagnosed with autism and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. 
She was prone to tantrums and acts of violence against other students, and she 
frequently eloped from the classroom.  
10. Per the terms of her Individualized Education Plan, Student 1 was 
assigned a one -on-one instructional aide.  When the f all 2022 semester started, Laura 
Hogan was respondent’s one -on-one instructional aide. When the District hired 
Katherine Levin in September 2022, she took over for Ms. Hogan. Ms. Hogan is now a 
full-time nursing student. Ms. Levin is still employed as an instructional aide at Pioneer.  
11. Both Ms. Hogan and Ms. Levin testified at length at hearing  about 
Student 1’s  behavior . Ms. Hogan described Student 1 as “unregulated emotionally.” 
Ms. Levin acknowledged Student 1 was difficult to work with but explained that she 
had a good relationship with her. According to Ms. Levin, respondent used to refer to 
Student 1 as the “monster child.”  5 Events on October 24, 2022  
12. On October 24, 2022, while Ms. Levin and Student 1 were walking to the 
Learning Center, Student 1 told Ms. Levin that her mother had given her a new Elsa 
doll from the Disney movie Frozen . Ms. Levin asked Student 1 if she received the doll 
for being good . Student 1 replied that her mother had choked her and held her hands 
up to her own neck to simulate choking. Respondent was not in the Learning Center, 
so Ms. Levin walked Student 1 back to her general education classroom. She reported 
what Student 1 said to the Pioneer principal and the two of them filled out a report to file with Child Protective Services  (CPS).  
13. After Ms. Levin filled out the CPS report, she w ent outside during the 
morning recess, where she saw Student 1 attempting to play frisbee with the boys in her class. Ms. Levin could see Student 1 was getting frustrated because she was unable to catch the frisbee. She began to scream and told one of the boys in her class to “shut the fuck up.” Ms. Levin redirected Student 1 to another activity  away from the boys , 
and they returned to class when the recess was over.  
14. When Student 1 returned to class, she realized the worksheet she had 
been working on before recess was still on her desk. She wanted a new worksheet, so 
she ripped up the one that was on her desk. Ms. Levin told her she needed to place 
the ripped -up worksh eet in the trash, and Student 1 told her to “shut the fuck up” and 
walked out of the classroom. Respondent had previously requested Ms. Levin keep 
Student 1 away from other children when she was in an agitated state, so Ms. Levin 
walked with her to the sch ool office.  
15. Student 1 calmed down once she got to the office. However, at 
approximately 1:30 p.m., she looked out the window and saw her class playing on the 6 playground during an afternoon recess. She started screaming and throwing a tantrum 
because she wanted to go outside with her class.  Respondent was present in the office 
at the time, and she began acting as if she were screaming back at Student 1, although 
no sound was coming from respondent’s mouth. According to Ms. Levin, that only 
upset Student 1 more. She calmed down after about 20 minutes, and respondent told 
Ms. Levin to take a break. While Ms. Levin took a short break, respondent took Student 
1 outsi de to the playground.  
16. Ms. Levin went outside and saw that Student 1 was again attempting to 
play frisbee. She then walked over to the slide and climbed to the top.  Rather than 
slide down the slide, the child in front of Student 1 sat down at the top. When she did,  
Student 1 kicked her in the back. When Student 1 got to the bottom of the slide, Ms. Levin redirected her away from the other children. They played frisbee for several 
minutes before Student 1 told one of the other children to “shut the fuck up .” At that 
point, Ms. Lev in decided to remove Student 1 from the playground.  
17. As they were walking back toward the school , Student 1 realized that 
recess was coming to an end , and she became agitated. She  sat down on the blacktop , 
began screaming, and refused to move. Ms. Levin  requested assistance over the radio 
and Ms. Hogan and respondent came out to assist. Ms. Levin suggested that they stay 
on the blacktop with Student 1 until she calmed down, but respondent said they 
needed to take Student 1 back to the school office. Ms. L evin was on Student 1’s left,  
and respondent was on her  right.  They were able to convince Student 1 to stand up  
and start walking toward the office, but they only made it halfway before she sat down 
again, refused to move, and started screaming “shut the fuck up .” 
18. Respondent told Ms. Levin she wished they could record Student 1 so her 
mother could see the way she behaved at school. Ms. Levin pulled out her phone and 7 started recording Student 1 . According to Ms. Levin, Student 1 continued screaming 
obscenities, but after several moments, she “screamed like she had never screamed 
before.” Ms. Levin looked up and saw that respondent was using each of her hands to 
twist the skin on Student 1’s right forearm  arm in opposite directions . 
19. Ms. Levin told respondent that they needed to call Student 1’s mother. 
Respondent agreed  and told Ms. Hogan to contact the office via radio and have 
someone call her. Ms. Hogan did so, and then redirected her attention to shielding the 
other children from hearing and seeing how Student 1 was behaving. Ms. Hogan heard 
Student 1 continue to scream but did not actually see respondent twist her arm. The 
Pioneer principal eventually came out to assist , and h e was able to pick Student 1 up 
off the ground and take her to the office.  
20. A.C. is Student 1’s mother  and testified at hearing. On October 24, 2022, 
she received a call from Pioneer telling her she needed to pick Student 1 up from 
school. As A.C.  was walking toward the Pioneer office, she encountered Ms. Levin and 
respondent. A.C. and Student 1 both liked and trusted Ms. Levin. As  A.C. approached 
Ms. Levin and respondent, she noticed Ms. Levin  had her arms crossed and looked 
very pale. Respondent was very angry. Her arms were flailing , and she told A.C. it was 
time for Student 1 “ to go someplace else. ” 
21. After several moments, Student 1 came running toward her mother and 
said, “she hurt me” and “my arm hurts.” When they got into the vehicle, Student 1 
began hyperventilating. A.C. looked at Student 1’s  right  arm and noticed the skin 
looked red.  8 Prior Incident  
22. Ms. Levin had difficulty sleeping that night based on what she observed. 
The following day, she went to report the incident to District Superintendent Patrick 
Paturel.  When she did, Mr. Paturel asked Ms. Levin if she recalled any other incidents 
between respondent and Student 1. She told him no. However, later that evening, she recalled an incident in which respondent “slammed” Student 1 into a chair, which she reported to Mr. Paturel  the following morning.  
23. Ms. Levin also described this prior incident in her testimony at hearing. It 
occurred approximately one and a half weeks before the incident on October 24, 2022. Student 1 was in the Learning Center and was being rude to Ms. Levin. Respondent did 
not like the way Student 1 was behaving and walked over to correct the behavior. 
Student 1 was “flippant” with respondent and refused to sit down on her chair. When 
she did, respondent turned the chair around, wrapped her arm around Student 1’s torso, and forcefull y pushed her back down into a seated position on the chair. 
Student 1 got up and walked over to respondent’s chair, at which point respondent 
went over and tipped the chair upward to get Student 1 off it. She then told Ms. Levin 
to remove Student 1 from the Learning Center.  
District Investigation  
24. Mr. Paturel testified at hearing.  He became the District Superintendent  in 
2022 and is  familiar with Student 1. He described her behavior as “attention -seeking,” 
and she was known to  rip up papers, throw chairs, and harm other students when she 
did not get her way.  Mr. Paturel  did not personally witness the incident on October 24, 
2022, and only learned of it when Ms. Levin went to speak with him the following 9 morning. Based on Ms. Levin’s demeanor, Mr. Paturel believed she had witnessed 
something that was serious and “clearly wrong.”  
25. Mr. Paturel explained that it is never advisable for an educator to place 
their hands on a child. Pioneer employees are required to attend Crisis Prevention Intervention training, which instructs that a student should only be restrained as a “last 
resort,”  and only if the student poses a threat to their own safety or the safety of 
others. Based on Mr. Paturel’s training and experience, he does not believe respondent 
should have placed her hands on Student 1. She was being stubborn and 
noncomplian t, but she was sitting on the ground and refusing to move, which did not 
pose a threat to her own safety or the safety of others.  
26. Several days after the incident on October 24, 2022, Mr. Paturel 
interviewed Student 1 and A.C. in his office. Mr. Paturel used a Pioneer yearbook to 
build rapport with Student 1. When he show ed her photographs  of her friends and 
some Pioneer staff members  she responded favorably. However, when Student 1 saw 
respondent’s photograph  in the book, she became angry and said, “she hurt my arm.” 
She then repeatedly grabbed her arm and twisted it while saying “two hands.” Mr. 
Paturel showed Student 1 several other photographs  to help calm her down. 
Respondent’s photograph  was t he only one Student 1 had a negative reaction to.  A.C. 
discussed th e interview in her testimony at hearing as well , and her account of what 
occurred was consistent with Mr. Paturel’s . 
27. Mr. Paturel interviewed respondent on October 27, 2022. She told him 
she did not feel the need to defend herself because she had done nothing wrong.  10 Video Recording  
28. A 25-second video recording  of the incident was received in evidence at 
hearing. According to Ms. Levin, she recorded for longer than 25 seconds, and she 
does not know what happened to the additional footage. In the recording, Student 1 
screams, “you’re squeezing me,” and then says “shut the fuck up”  two times.  Only 
Student 1’s legs and feet are visible on video. Ms. Levin was shown the recording at 
hearing . Her demeanor was calm throughout most of her testimony. However, she 
became visibly upset when watch ed the recording and heard Student 1 scream.  
Respondent’s Evidence  
RESPONDENT ’S TESTIMONY  
29. Respondent testified at hearing.  She received her mild/moderate special 
education credential in 2013 and started teaching special education at a school in El Dorado Hills, California , after which she went to work for the District.  
30. Respondent first met Student 1 when she was in preschool. She was 
called into Student 1’s classroom on multiple occasions because Student 1 was behaving inappropriately or harming other students. Respondent employed various de-escalation techniques to comb at Student 1’s bad behavior. The techniques were 
occasionally successful but usually short lived. Respondent explained that if  Student 1 
got her way she was happy, but as soon as she was asked to do something she did not want to do her behavior worsened dr amatically.  She would use profanity, feign injury, 
and accuse others of hurting her.  
31. Respondent testified that she “loved” Student 1. However, she 
acknowledges using  the phrase “monster child”  in reference to Student 1.  She typically 11 checked in with Ms. Levin in the morning  and would ask whether they would be 
dealing with the “monster child” or the “princess”  that day . She never used the phrase 
in conversation with Student 1, or in any environment where an other  student could 
overhear.  
32. On October 24, 2022, respondent first became aware that Student 1 was 
having a bad day shortly after lunch, when someone told respondent Student 1 was in 
the office and screaming. Respondent went to the office to assist. She acknowledges 
that she pretended to scream in silence while looking at Student 1. It was a technique 
she used frequently, because she found that it usually made Student 1 laugh, which helped her calm down. Respondent used the technique with other students as well, 
and no one ever complai ned about it. Ms. Levin told respondent that the technique 
was not working. However, once Ms. Levin walked away to take a break, the technique 
did help Student 1 calm down.  
33. The Pioneer principal insisted that respondent take Student 1 to the 
playground for recess. When Ms. Levin’s break was over, she went out to the 
playground and respondent returned to the Learning Center. A few moments later, 
respondent heard Ms. Levin say over the radio, “Ms. Machleit I need you.” Respondent 
returned to the playground to find Student 1 on the ground and screaming 
hysterically. Respondent offered her hand, which Student 1 took, and they began 
walking toward the office. However, after a short  distance, Student 1 sat down on the 
ground again. Respondent convinced her stand up and continue walking, but Student  
1 sat down again and refused to move.  
34. Respondent adamantly denies twisting Student 1’s arm. She does not 
know why Ms. Levin would say that she did, but she believes it is likely over something 
“personal.” Respondent believes Ms. Levin likely did something to injure Student 1 and 12 is trying to blame respondent for it. She  does not believe she would have even been 
physically able to physically harm Student 1 . Respondent  was diagnosed with cancer in 
August 2021. She underwent radiation therapy, which resulted in fibrosis and severe 
pain in her upper extremities.  Respondent submitted a note from her physician, dated 
June 1, 2023, which states, in pertinent part:  
[Respondent] was under my care for cancer directed therapy from 12/13/21 through 1/20/22 for daily treatments. She has since been seen regularly in follow up. I 
have documented that around 9/2022, she complained of 
ongoing/worsening pain and discomfort in her right chest and right upper extremity which limited her mobility as a direct result of treatment. I referred her for physical therapy 
for evaluation and management.  
35. Respondent did not tell Ms. Levin to record the incident with Student 1. 
Ms. Levin asked respondent if she should record the incident, and respondent told her 
it was illegal to video record a child without parental permission. Respondent told Ms. 
Levin that if she was going to record Student 1, it needed to be an audio recording 
only. Respondent did not learn until later that Ms. Levin recorded both audio and 
video of the incident.  
36. Respondent denies that she was angry when she spoke to Student 1’s 
mother on October 24, 2022.  She explained that Student 1 had a tough day and was 
using inappropriate language, but she did not raise her voice or tell Student 1’s 
mother that it was time for Student 1 “to go someplace else.”  13 37. Since resigning from Pioneer , respondent  has applied for substitute 
teaching positions but has not been approved. She no longer intends to return to the 
classroom and only requested a hearing in this matter out of principle.  
CHARACTER WITNESS TESTIMONY  
38. Respondent called several character witnesses to testify on her behalf at 
hearing, one of whom was Deva Smith. Respondent was the special education teacher 
for her two daughters. According to Ms. Smith, respondent is an “amazing woman.” 
Her daughters had s ignificant behavioral problems, and respondent always treated 
them with kindness and compassion. Ms. Smith believes Mr. Paturel is one of the worst 
things that happened to the District, because when he became superintendent “it all 
fell apart.”  
39. Sarah Giardin testified at hearing. Respondent was her two children’s 
special education teacher. She never saw respondent behave inappropriately with a 
child. She was very caring and always communicated with her when her children had 
behavioral issues in s chool.  
40. Katie Fitzpatrick worked as a special education instructional aide for the 
District for seven years. She never saw respondent become frustrated with her students. On the contrary, respondent always remained calm and professional, and she 
“had so much love for students.”  
41. Ms. Fitzpatrick trained Ms. Levin after she was hired. She believes Ms. 
Levin had her own ideas about how best to support special education students that 
differed from those Ms. Fitzpatrick was attempting to impart. However, she believes Ms. Levin is an ho nest person and does not think she would make up the allegations 
against respondent for no reason.  14 42. Nicole Stevens worked as a staff psychologist for the El Dorado County 
Office of Education from 2015 to 2023. She frequently interacted with respondent and 
never observed her behave inappropriately toward any student. Ms. Stevens is familiar 
with Student 1 . She testified that Student 1 typically had between 15 and 32 behavioral 
outbursts per day, although she admitted she never personally witnessed that many. 
When questioned on how she arrived at her estimate, she replied that the outbursts 
were “documented .” 
Analysis  
43. Complainant bears the burden of proving by clear and convincing 
evidence that the allegations set forth in the Accusation are true, and that they 
constitute cause to discipline respondent’s credential. While four  different causes for 
discipline are alleged, they all pertain to the allegation s that respondent physically 
harmed Student 1 on two occasions in fall 2022.  
44. Multiple witnesses testified at hearing about Student 1’s behavioral 
history. It is undisputed that she was a moderate to severe special education student 
who was assigned a one-on-one instruction al aide, and that she was prone to 
tantrums and acts of violence. However, only two witnesses provided firsthand  
accounts regarding the allegations complainant contends constitute  cause  to revoke 
respondent’s credentials : Ms. Levin and respondent herself.  
45. Ms. Levin testified that respondent twisted the skin on Student 1’s right 
forearm during a behavioral episode on October 24, 2022, causing Student 1 to scream in pain. She also testified that a week and a half prior to that incident, she saw 
respondent slam Student  1 into a chair in the Learning Center when she was not 
following directions.  Respondent testified that she never twisted the skin on Student 15 1’s arm  as Ms. Levin descri bed. Rather, she testified that she offered her hand for 
Student 1 to hold as they walked to the office . She denies ever slamming Student 1 
into a chair in the Learning Center . 
46. Evidence  Code section 780 sets forth various factors to consider when 
determining the credibility of a witness. Relevant factors include: (1) the witness’s 
demeanor while testifying; (2) the character of the witness’s testimony; (3) the 
witness’s capacity to perce ive and recollect; (4) the existence or nonexistence of bias; 
(5) prior statements of the witness that are consistent or inconsistent with their 
testimony at hearing; (6) the existence or nonexistence of a fact testified to by the 
witness; and (7) the witness’s attitude toward the action in which he or she testifies.  
47. As stated above, Ms. Levin’s demeanor remained calm throughout most 
of her testimony. However, she became visibly upset while viewing the recording when 
she heard Student 1 scream. Clearly, she is still emotionally affected by what she 
witnessed on October 24, 2022. Ms. Levin was standing next to Student 1 and clearly 
articulated what she witnessed respondent doing to Student 1’s right forearm. Ms. 
Levin’s testimonial account of what occurred was also very consistent with her prior 
verbal and written accoun ts shortly after the incident occurred.  
48. Respondent testified that Ms. Levin simply made up the allegations. She 
was unable to explain why Ms. Levin would do so, but suspects it was over something 
“personal.” Respondent  also allege d Ms. Levin harmed Student 1. That allegation  is 
unsubstantiated and contradicted by the overwhelming weight of the evidence. A.C. 
testified that both she and Student 1 liked and trusted Ms. Levin. Ms. Levin testified 
that she had a good relationship with Student 1.  16 49. It is also noteworthy that Ms. Levin’s testimony was limited in nature to 
the two isolated incidents at issue here. She did not allege that respondent routinely 
abused Student 1 or any other child. She did not allege that respondent is a bad 
teacher or tha t she was unprofessional with Pioneer faculty or staff. Ms. Levin did not 
appear to exaggerate the allegations against respondent. That renders her account of 
each incident very credible. As she and respondent were the only adult eyewitnesses 
to each incid ent, Ms. Levin had every opportunity to embellish. She did not.  
50. Respondent  denied any wrongdoing for either incident in her interview 
with Mr. Paturel and in her testimony at hearing.  She suggested alternatively that 
Student 1 was feigning injury or that Ms. Levin injured her and lied about it. However, 
she was unable to explain why Ms. Levin would have done so. Respondent testified she 
“loved” Student 1, even though Student 1 was clearly one of the most challenging 
Pioneer students and was prone to tantrums and violence against other children.  
51. Student 1 did not testify at hearing.  However, both Mr. Paturel and A.C. 
testified in detail about Student 1’s behavior during the investigatory interview when 
she was shown photographs of Pioneer students and faculty in a yearbook. Student 1 
reacted positively to photographs of her classmates. However, when she saw a 
photogra ph of respondent, she became angry and spontaneously exclaimed that 
respondent hurt her. The adults’ observations of Student 1’s behavior are admissible 
as direct evidence of her anger  and state of mind following the incident on October 
24, 2022. Student 1’s statements are admissible as administrative hearsay, to the 
extent that they supplement or explain other evidence in the record . (Gov. Code, § 
11513, subd. (d).)  That evidence exists, in the testimony of Ms. Levin and A.C. 17 52. When all the evidence is considered, complainant established by clear 
and convincing evidence that the allegations in the Accusation are true. Therefore, 
cause exists to discipline respondent’s credentials . 
53. In Morrison v. State Board of Education  (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, the California 
Supreme Court concluded that a teaching credential cannot be disciplined for immoral 
conduct, unprofessional conduct, or conduct involving moral turpitude “unless that 
conduct indicates that the [educator] is unfit to teach.” ( Id. at p. 229.) The Court 
outlined factors to consider when determining whether an educator’s conduct 
demonstrates unfitness to teach, which have been codified in California Code of 
Regulations, title 5, secti on 80302, subdivision (a). The factors are:  
(1) the likelihood th at the conduct may have adversely 
affected students or fellow teachers, and the degree of such 
adversity anticipated;  
(2) the proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct;  
(3) the types of credentials held or sought by the person 
involved;  
(4) any extenuating or aggravating circumstances 
surrounding the conduct;  
(5) the praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives 
resulting in the conduct;  
(6) the likelihood of recurrence of the question conduct;  18 (7) the extent to which disciplinary action may have an 
adverse impact or chilling effect on the constitutional rights 
of the person involved, or other teachers, and;  
(8) the publicity or notoriety given to the conduct.  
LIKELIHOOD OF ADVERSE EFFECTS ON STUDENTS OR OTHER TEACHERS  
54. Respondent’s misconduct clearly affected Student 1, as it caused her 
physical pain and emotional trauma . It is also negatively impacted Ms. Levin, in that 
she had difficulty sleeping after witnessing the incident on October 24, 2022.  
PROXIMITY OR REMOTENESS IN TIME 
55. The incidents at issue here occurred nearly three years ago.  The 
offending conduct is more remote than proximate in time.  
TYPES OF CREDENTIALS HELD OR SOUGHT  
56. Respondent holds a  Clear Education Specialist Instruction Credential  and 
a Crosscultural, Language, and Academic Development Certificate. She previously held 
other credentials, including a Clear Multiple Subject Teaching Credential, over which 
the Commission retains jurisdiction. (Ed. Code, § 44440, subd. (b)(3).)  
EXTENUATING OR AGGRAVATING CIRCUMSTANCES  
57. Neither the Education Code nor the applicable regulations specify what 
constitutes “extenuating circumstances.” However, California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80300, subdivision (m), defines “mitigating factor” as “an event or 
circumstance which  demonstrates that the public, school children and the profession 
would be adequately protected by a more lenient degree of adverse action or no 19 adverse action whatsoever.”  California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80300, 
subdivision (b), lists aggravating factors, the presence of which indicate a greater 
degree of discipline is necessary to protect students and the teaching profession. 
These factors include, in perti nent part: (1) a prior record of adverse action; (2) that the 
misconduct significantly harmed a child, the public, or the educational system; and (3) 
the credential holder demonstrated indifference toward the consequence of the 
misconduct.  
58. Respondent has no prior record of discipline with the Commission. 
However, as discussed above, her misconduct significantly harmed Student 1 and Ms. 
Levin. Respondent has not accept ed any responsibility for her actions. Instead, she 
alleged that either Student 1 or Ms. Levin is lying about what occurred.  
PRAISEWORTHINESS OR BLAMEWORTHINESS OF MOTIVES  
59. There was nothing praiseworthy about respondent’s actions. She became 
frustrated with Student 1’s behavior and resorted to physical violence to correct it.  
LIKELIHOOD OF RECURRENCE  
60. Respondent resigned from Pioneer , effective May 15, 2023. She does not 
intend to return to the classroom. The likelihood of the conducting recurring  is 
minimal.  
CHILLING EFFECT  
61. There is no evidence that disciplining respondent would have a chilling 
effect on respondent’s constitutional rights or the constitutional rights of other 
educators.  20 PUBLICITY OR NOTORIETY GIVEN TO CONDUCT  
62. No evidence was presented that the conduct at issue was either 
publicized or notorious.  
Conclusion  
63. Complainant bears the burden of proving by clear and convincing 
evidence that respondent engaged in, unprofessional conduct, immoral conduct, and  
conduct involving moral turpitude which indicates s he is unfit to teach. When all the 
evidence is considered in light of the Morrison  factors, complainant has met her 
burden.  
LEGAL CONCLUSIONS  
Burden and Standard of Proof  
1. Complainant bears the burden of proving the allegations in the 
Accusation by clear and convincing evidence to a reasonable certainty. ( Gardner v. 
Commission on Professional Competence  (1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035.)  Clear and 
convincing evidence requires proof that is so clear as to leave no substantial doubt 
and that is sufficiently strong to command the unhesitating assent of every reasonable 
mind. ( In re Marriage of Brooks  (2008) 169 Cal.App.4th 176, 190.)  
Applicable Law  
2. Pursuant to the Education Code, commencing with section 44000, and 
California Code of Regulations, title 5, commencing with section 80000, the 
Commission is responsible for credentialing teachers in public schools in California, 21 including issuing credentials and taking adverse action against applicants and 
credential holders.  
3. Education Code section 44345 provides in part:  
The Commission may deny any application for the issuance of a credential or for the redenial of a credential made by 
an applicant who falls under any of the following 
categories:  
[¶] … [¶] 
(e) Has committed any act involving moral turpitude.  
[¶] … [¶] 
Any denial pursuant to subdivisions (a) to (e), inclusive, shall 
be based upon reasons related to the applicant’s fitness to 
teach or fitness to perform other duties which the 
credential would authorize the applicant to perform.  
4. Moral turpitude has been described as “any crime or misconduct 
committed without excuse, or ‘any dishonest or immoral’ act not necessarily a crime.” (
Clerici v. Department of Motor Vehicles  (1990) 224 Cal.App.3d 1016, 1017.)  
5. Education Code section 44421 provides in part:  
The Commission on Teacher Credentialing shall privately admonish, publicly reprove, revoke, or suspend for immoral 
or unprofessional conduct, or for persistent defiance of, and 
refusal to obey, the laws regulating the duties of persons 22 serving in the public school system, or for any cause that 
would have warranted the denial of an application for a 
credential or the renewal thereof, or for evident unfitness 
for service.  
6. The California Supreme Court has recognized that the terms “immoral 
conduct” and “ unprofessional  conduct” substantially overlap one another and conduct 
that constitutes one often includes the other. ( Morrison v. State Bd. of Ed. , supra , 1 
Cal.3d 214, 221, fn. 9.) Additionally, in San Diego Unified School District v. Commission 
on Professional Competence  (2011) 194 Cal.App.4th 1454, the court explained:  
Moreover, the definition of immoral or unprofessional conduct must be considered in conjunction with the unique position of public school teachers, upon whom are imposed 
“responsibilities and limitations on freedom of action which 
do not exist in regard to  other callings.” [Citation.]  
(
Id., at p. 1466.)  
7. Immoral conduct is sometime s considered as synonymous with 
“dishonesty” or a high degree of unfairness. ( Board of Education of the San Francisco 
Unified School District v. Weiland  (1960) 179 Cal.App.3d 8089, 811.) The court 
explained in Palo Verde Unified School District of Riverside v. Hensey  (190) 9 
Cal.App.3d 967, 972:  
The term “immoral” has been defined as that which is 
hostile to the welfare of the general public and contrary to 
good morals. Immorality includes conduct inconsistent with 
rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, 23 dissoluteness; or as willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct 
showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable 
members of the community, and as an inconsiderate 
attitude toward good order and the public welfare.  
8. “Evident unfitness for service” means a teacher is clearly not fit, not 
adapted to or unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of temperamental defects 
or inadequacies. ( Woodland v. Joint Unified School District v. Commission on 
Professional Competence  (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444.) “Unlike ‘unprofessional 
conduct,’ ‘evident unfitness for service’ connotes a fixed character trait, presumably 
not remediable merely on receipt of notice that one’s conduct fails to meet the 
expectations of the employing  school district.” ( Id.) 
9. Education Code section 44440, subdivision (b), provides:  
The suspension or expiration of any credential, its surrender 
without the written consent of the commission, or a revocation pursuant to Section 44423 does not deprive the 
commission of its authority to do the following:  
(1) Institute or continue a disciplinary proceeding against 
the credential holder upon any ground provided by law.  
(2) Enter an order suspending or revoking the credential.  
(3) Issue a public reproval or private admonition to the 
credential holder.  
10. California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 803000, states in part:  24 [¶] ... [¶] 
(b) “Aggravatin g factor” is an event or circumstance which 
demonstrates that a greater degree of adverse action for an 
act of professional misconduct is needed to adequately 
protect the public, schoolchildren or the profession. 
Aggravating factors may include, but are no t limited to, the 
following:  
[¶] ... [¶]  
(2) that the misconduct evidences multiple acts of 
wrongdoing or demonstrate a pattern of misconduct;  
(3) that the misconduct was surrounded by or followed by 
bad faith, dishonesty, or other violation of the laws governing educators;  
(4) that the misconduct significantly harmed a child 
entrusted to the care of a credential holder or applicant, significantly harmed the public or the educational system;  
(5) that the holder or applicant demonstrated indifference 
to toward the conseque nce of the misconduct, which 
includes failure to comply with known court orders; or  
[¶] ... [¶]  
11. As set forth in Factual Finding  53, California Code of Regulations, title 5, 
section 80302, subdivision (a), sets forth the factors to consider “to determine the 25 relationship between the alleged misconduct and the applicant’s or holder’s fitness, 
competence, or ability to effectively perform the duties authorized by the credential.”  
Cause s for Discipline  
12. Based on the Factual Findings and Legal Conclusions as a whole, 
complainant established by clear and convincing evidence that respondent engaged in  
unprofessional conduct by resorting to physical violence against Student 1. Consequently, cause exists to discipline respondent’s credentials pursuant to 
Education Code section 44421.  
13. Based on the Factual Findings and Legal Conclusions as a whole, 
complainant established by clear and convincing evidence that respondent engaged in immoral conduct by resorting to physical violence against Student 1. Consequently, 
cause exists to discipline respondent’s credentials pursuant to Education Code section 
44421.  
14. Based on the Factual Findings and Legal Conclusions as a whole, 
complainant established that respondent committed acts demonstrating her evident unfitness for service by resorting to physical violence against Student 1. Consequently, cause exists to discip line respondent’s credentials pursuant to Education Code section 
44421.  
15. Based on the Factual Findings and Legal Conclusions as a whole, 
complainant established by clear and convincing evidence that respondent committed 
acts of moral turpitude by resorting to physical violence against Student 1. 
Consequently, cause exists to discipline respondent’s credentials pursuant to Education Code sections 44421 and 44345, subdivision (e).  26 Aggravating Factor s 
16. Complainant established by clear and convincing evidence that 
respondent’s misconduct evidences multiple acts of wrongdoing demonstrating a 
pattern of misconduct, was surrounded by bad faith, and significantly harmed a child 
trusted to her care. Complainan t also established by clear and convincing evidence 
that respondent has demonstrated indifference toward the consequence of her 
misconduct.  Consequently, complainant established that a greater degree of adverse 
action is needed to adequately protect the pu blic, schoolchildren, or the teaching 
profession.  
Appropriate Discipline  
17. Pursuant to Education Code section 44421, the Commission shall 
privately admonish or publicly reprove a credential holder, or revoke or suspend her  
credential, if the credential holder has engaged in immoral or unprofessional conduct, action that warrants denial of an application for a credential or the renewal thereof, or 
is evidently unfit for service.  Careful consideration has been given to the available 
disciplinary options. Respondent has had a lengthy career as a teacher and has no 
disciplinary record  with the Commission. However, she lost her temper and physically 
harmed a five -year-old special education student trusted to her care on two separate 
occasions. While the incidents appear to have been isolated, respondent’s behavior 
demonstrates a grievous lapse in judgment expected of an educator. When all the 
evidence is considered , complainant demonstrated that respondent is unfit to teach, 
and revocation of her  credential s is necessary to protect children, the public, and the 
teaching profession.  27 ORDER  
The credentials and certificates issued to respondent Nanette Machleit by the 
California C ommission on Teacher Credentialing are  REVOKED .
DATE:  June 5, 202 5  
MATTHEW S. BLOCK  
Administrative Law Judge  
Office of Administrative Hearings  
 
