BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
In the Matter of the Accusation Against: 
CHRISTINE DEANN WATTE BECK, Respondent 
Agency Case No. 2-505088054 
OAH No. 2024030417 
PROPOSED DECISION 
Matthew S. Block, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ), Office of Administrative 
Hearings (OAH), State of California, heard this matter on September 3, 2024, by 
videoconference from Sacramento, California. 
Phillip L. Arthur, Deputy Attorney General, represented Amy Reising 
(complainant), Deputy Director of the California Commission on Teacher Credentialing 
(Commission).
Michael P. Smith, Attorney at Law, represented Christine Deann Watte Beck 
(respondent), who appeared. 
Evidence was received, the record closed, and the matter submitted for decision 
on September 3, 2024. 2 FACTUAL FINDINGS
Jurisdictional Matters 
1. On October 6, 1981, the Commission issued respondent a Certificate of 
Clearance. It expired on November 1, 1986, and has not been renewed. On December 
24, 1982, the Commission issued respondent a Clear Multiple Subject Teaching 
Credential. It expired on January 1, 1988, and has not been renewed. On June 6, 1985, 
the Commission issued respondent a Life Multiple Subject Teaching Credential 
(credential). The credential was in full force and effect at all relevant times and does 
not expire. 
2. On February 6, 2024, complainant signed and thereafter filed an 
Accusation against respondent. The Accusation alleges cause to discipline 
respondent’s credential based on: (1) unprofessional conduct; (2) evident unfitness for 
service; (3) immoral conduct; and (4) acts involving moral turpitude. More specifically, 
the Accusation alleges respondent subjected her credential to discipline by: (1) 
physically striking a student on two separate occasions; (2) tugging on the hood of a 
student’s jacket, thereby applying pressure to the child’s throat; (3) placing her hands 
on three different children to physically move them; and (4) yelling at children or 
speaking to them in an angry or frustrated tone. As factors in aggravation, 
complainant alleges respondent’s misconduct involved multiple acts demonstrating a 
pattern of misconduct, and that she significantly harmed a child trusted to her care, 
the public, or the educational system.
3. Respondent timely filed a Notice of Defense to the Accusation. The 
matter was set for evidentiary hearing before an ALJ of the OAH, an independent 3 adjudicative agency of the State of California, pursuant to Government Code section 
11500 et seq. 
Complainant’s Evidence 
4. From October 1, 2022, through June 29, 2023, respondent was employed 
by the Tulare School District as a kindergarten teacher at Heritage Elementary School 
(Heritage) in Tulare, California. M.C. was a student in respondent’s class. M.C.’s mother, 
B.Q., testified 0F1at hearing.
5. Shortly after the school year started, M.C. told B.Q. respondent struck her 
on the hand and head. B.Q. reported the incident to the school on October 5, 2022.
Gabriela Jimenez served as the Heritage Vice Principal during the 2022-2023 school 
year. She was responsible for conducting teacher observations and student discipline. 
She was also tasked with investigating M.C.’s allegations against respondent.
6. Ms. Jimenez testified at hearing. She explained that when allegations are 
made against a teacher, the standard protocol is to speak with the teacher to get their 
account of the incident. When Ms. Jimenez spoke with respondent, she denied striking 
M.C. Respondent explained that M.C. was not doing her work, and respondent patted 
her on the hand to encourage her to do so. According to Ms. Jimenez, respondent’s 
account of the incident sounded “harmless.”
7. On October 11, 2022, B.Q. met with Ms. Jimenez, respondent, and 
Heritage Principal Elaine Sewell to discuss the matter. Respondent again denied 
striking M.C. and maintained she merely patted M.C. on the hand to encourage her to 
 
1 Janice Burt provided Spanish interpretation.4 do her work. B.Q. explained that since her daughter first mentioned the incident, she 
would periodically wake up at night and say respondent’s name aloud. B.Q. felt this 
showed M.C. was afraid of respondent, which led her to believe M.C. was telling the 
truth about respondent hitting her. Ms. Sewell told B.Q. that the entire situation 
seemed like a “misunderstanding.” At the conclusion of the meeting, B.Q. felt like no 
one who was present believed what she and her daughter reported.
8. On January 17, 2023, a parent complained that respondent had pulled on 
the hood of their child’s jacket, which caused pressure to the child’s neck. On January 
24, 2023, B.Q. contacted the school and reported M.C. told her respondent struck her 
in the stomach. She also said M.C. was afraid to go to school because respondent 
made her do things she did not want to do. At B.Q.’s request, M.C. was placed in a 
different kindergarten class a short time later. According to B.Q., M.C.’s demeanor and 
attitude about going to school improved after she was removed from respondent’s 
class. 
9. Also on January 24, 2023, Ms. Jimenez conducted a 30-minute 
observation of respondent teaching her kindergarten class, though she was unable to 
recall at hearing whether the observation occurred before or after she learned of B.Q.’s 
second complaint. During the observation, she observed respondent place her hands 
on three different students. In one instance, respondent placed both her hands on a 
child’s upper arm and forcefully turned her around. In the other two instances, 
respondent grabbed two children by the wrist and forcefully led them from one 
location to another in the classroom. According to Ms. Jimenez, respondent was 
frustrated with the three children because they were not following directions. 
10. Ms. Jimenez also observed respondent yell at multiple children during 
the observation. For example, she yelled comments such as “let’s not argue,” “let’s not 5 pout,” and “stop talking!” Ms. Jimenez also observed respondent get very close to a 
child’s face and tell the child to “be quiet” in a stern tone of voice. She was disturbed 
by these observations and reported them to Ms. Sewell. However, she acknowledged 
she never observed respondent physically harm a child, and she did not feel 
respondent’s behavior during the observation was so egregious that she needed to 
interrupt the lesson to stop it. 
11. Crystal Woolsey worked as an Instructional Aide in respondent’s 
classroom during the 2022-2023 school year. Based on what Ms. Jimenez told Ms. 
Sewell she observed in respondent’s classroom, Ms. Sewell spoke with Ms. Woolsey on 
January 26, 2023, to see if she had any concerns about respondent’s interactions with 
students. Ms. Woolsey told Ms. Sewell that respondent would “holler at kids.” When 
Ms. Sewell asked if Ms. Woolsey ever saw respondent place her hands on a child, she
began to cry and told Ms. Sewell that respondent would occasionally “grab” children 
but would never hurt them. 
12. Later that evening, Ms. Woolsey called Ms. Sewell to provide additional 
information. Ms. Woolsey was still emotional, so they agreed to speak at school the 
next day. When they did, Ms. Woolsey started crying again and told Ms. Sewell that 
respondent “grabs [children] by the wrist and drags them where she wants them to 
be.” 
13. On January 31, 2023, Ms. Woolsey went back to Ms. Sewell and reported 
that respondent “sometimes charges at children and they get scared and cry.” Ms. 
Sewell asked Ms. Woolsey if she would want her own child placed in respondent’s 
class, and she rapidly shook her head no. Ms. Woolsey apologized for not coming 
forward about respondent’s behavior toward children sooner, but also reiterated she 
did not “think [respondent] ever wanted to hurt them.” 6 14. Ms. Woolsey testified at hearing. She admitted she only saw respondent 
charge at a child on one occasion. When asked what she meant by “charge,” Ms. 
Woolsey explained that respondent walked toward the child briskly. She denied ever 
seeing respondent run toward a child. 
15. Ms. Woolsey observed respondent take a child by the arm on more than 
one occasion to lead them from one location to another in the classroom. However, 
she was unsure how many times this occurred. Further, she did not know whether 
respondent was pulling the child or whether it just appeared she was because the child 
was attempting to pull away from her. 
16. Ms. Sewell testified at hearing. She was the Principal at Heritage for 13 
years and recently retired. She is familiar with M.C. and acknowledged her behavior 
could be challenging. Ms. Sewell did not believe the October 2022 report that 
respondent struck M.C., and she said so at the meeting on October 11, 2022. Ms. 
Sewell also does not believe the January 2023 report that respondent struck M.C. in 
the stomach. In fact, she does not believe respondent ever harmed M.C. in any way. 
17. Ms. Sewell spoke with respondent after learning of the allegation that 
she pulled on the hood of a student’s jacket. Respondent denied doing so, and 
explained she was simply trying to wake a child who was falling asleep. Ms. Sewell 
found respondent’s explanation reasonable. 
18. Ms. Sewell observed respondent teaching her class on multiple occasions 
during the 2022-2023 school year and believes she is a good teacher. She never 
observed respondent lead a student by the hand or wrist in a non-gentle manner. 
However, she is aware of the allegations that respondent did so and believes Ms. 
Jimenez’s account of what occurred during the observation on January 23, 2023. Ms. 7 Sewell spoke with several of respondent’s students, who told her respondent did yell 
in class, but only when children were misbehaving. Ms. Sewell believes it is “possible” 
that the allegations in the Accusation against respondent have merit. However, she 
does not believe respondent has ever physically harmed a child. 
Respondent’s Evidence
19. Respondent testified at hearing. She explained that M.C. was frequently 
disruptive in class. For example, she would flap her arms, make whimpering sounds, 
and get up and walk around the classroom during lessons. Respondent believes M.C.’s 
behavior is consistent with that of an individual diagnosed with autism spectrum 
disorder. When she shared that belief with B.Q. at the meeting on October 11, 2022, 
B.Q. strongly denied that M.C. has any developmental disabilities. 
20. Respondent is aware of the allegation that she pulled on the hood of a 
child’s jacket. According to respondent, the child’s parent accused her of pulling on 
the hood and then offering the child candy to pacify her. Respondent explained that 
on the day of the incident, the children were working on an assignment when she 
noticed the child in question falling asleep. She placed her hand on the child’s back 
and told her to wake up, which startled the child, and she began to cry. Respondent 
assured the child she was not in trouble, and offered her a piece of Lifesaver candy, 
which is a tool she often employed to help that particular child focus. When she
discussed the incident with Ms. Sewell, Ms. Sewell told respondent she believed her, 
and said that the child’s parent was “a complainer.”
21. Respondent denies ever handling a child in an angry or physically 
aggressive manner. She denies ever dragging a child from one place to another but 
acknowledges leading them by the hand or arm if they are being disruptive in class. 8 Respondent has never charged at a child. She will walk “rapidly” toward a child if she 
believes it is necessary, but not in an angry manner. Other than the allegations at issue 
here, respondent has never received any complaints about her physical interactions 
with students or the way she speaks to them in her entire career as a teacher, and she 
has no disciplinary record with the Commission. 
Analysis 
22. Complainant bears the burden of proving the causes for discipline 
alleged in the Accusation by clear and convincing evidence. Complainant alleges 
respondent subjected her credential to discipline by: (1) physically striking M.C. on two 
separate occasions; (2) tugging on the hood of a student’s jacket, thereby applying 
pressure to the child’s throat; (3) placing her hands on three different children to 
physically move them; and (4) yelling at children or speaking to them in an angry or 
frustrated tone. 
23. Complainant failed to prove respondent struck M.C. on either occasion. 
B.Q. testified her daughter did not like respondent and seemed to enjoy school more 
once she was removed from respondent’s class. That testimony, however credible, is 
insufficient to conclude that respondent physically struck M.C. There were no 
eyewitnesses to either of the alleged incidents. M.C. did not testify at hearing. The only 
evidence introduced in support of the allegations were M.C.’s out-of-court statements 
to her mother.
24. In administrative hearings, hearsay evidence may only be used to 
supplement or explain other non-hearsay evidence. Hearsay evidence is not sufficient, 
in and of itself, to support a factual finding unless it would be admissible over 
objection in civil actions. (Gov. Code, § 11513, subd. (c).) The evidence of M.C.’s 9 statements to her mother do not supplement or explain other non-hearsay evidence
and are therefore insufficient to support a factual finding that the allegations are true. 
25. Complainant also failed to prove respondent tugged on the hood of a 
child’s jacket, thereby applying pressure to the child’s throat. The only evidence in 
support of the allegation was the initial parent report. The child did not testify, and 
there were no eyewitnesses to the alleged act. Moreover, respondent’s explanation of 
the incident in her testimony at hearing was reasonable. 
26. Complainant proved the allegation that respondent placed her hands on 
children and moved them using some degree of physical force. Although Ms. Woolsey 
stated she did not believe respondent intended to harm any of the students, she 
acknowledged there were multiple occasions she observed respondent grab a child by 
the wrist or arm and move them from one place to another. Moreover, Ms. Jimenez 
observed respondent forcibly move three different children during her observation 
because she was frustrated that they were not following directions. 
27. Complainant also proved the allegation that respondent yelled at 
children or spoke to them using an angry or frustrated tone. Ms. Woolsey credibly 
testified that respondent would routinely yell in the classroom, which is consistent with 
her initial statement to Ms. Sewell that respondent would “holler at kids.” It is also 
consistent with the statements of the children Ms. Sewell interviewed during her 
investigation, who indicated that respondent would yell at children when they were 
misbehaving or refusing to follow directions. Moreover, Ms. Jimenez observed 
respondent yelling at children on multiple occasions during her formal observation on 
January 24, 2023. 10 28. In (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, the California 
Supreme Court concluded that a teaching credential cannot be disciplined for immoral 
conduct, unprofessional conduct, or conduct involving moral turpitude “unless that 
conduct indicates [the educator] is unfit to teach.” ( . at p. 229.) The Court outlined 
factors to consider when determining whether an educator’s conduct demonstrates 
unfitness to teach, which have been codified in California Code of Regulations, title 5, 
section 80302, subdivision (a). The factors are: 
(1) the likelihood that the conduct may have adversely affected students or 
fellow teachers, and the degree of such adversity anticipated;
(2) the proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct; 
(3) the types of credentials held or sought by the person involved;
(4) any extenuating or aggravating circumstances surrounding the conduct; 
(5) the praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives resulting in the 
conduct; 
(6) the likelihood of recurrence of the questioned conduct; 
(7) the extent to which disciplinary action may have an adverse impact or 
chilling effect on the constitutional rights of the person involved, or other 
teachers; and
(8) the publicity or notoriety given to the conduct.11 Likelihood of Adverse Effects on Students or Other Teachers
29. In this case, respondent’s practice of yelling at kindergarten students and 
physically moving them by force likely had an adverse effect on the students, who are 
at an impressionable age and still developing emotionally. It also had an adverse effect 
on the Heritage employees who witnessed the misconduct. 
Proximity or Remoteness in Time of Conduct
30. The misconduct proven at hearing occurred in January 2023. 
Types of Credentials Held or Sought 
31. Respondent has held a Life Multiple Subject Teaching Credential for 
nearly 40 years, which authorizes her to teach children of different ages in a variety of 
school settings. It is imperative that she possess the temperament to exercise sound 
judgment, even when frustrated. 
Extenuating or Aggravating Circumstances 
32. Neither the Education Code nor the applicable regulations specify what 
constitutes “extenuating circumstances.” However, California Code of Regulations, title 
5, section 80300, subdivision (m), defines “mitigating factor” as “an event or 
circumstance which demonstrates that the public, school children and the profession 
would be adequately protected by a more lenient degree of adverse action or no 
adverse action whatsoever.” California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80300, 
subdivision (b), lists aggravating factors, the presence of which indicate a greater 
degree of discipline is necessary to protect students and the teaching profession. 
These factors include, in pertinent part: (1) a prior record of adverse action; (2) that the 
misconduct significantly harmed a child, the public, or the educational system; and (3) 12 the credential holder demonstrated indifference toward the consequence of the 
misconduct. 
33. Respondent has no prior record of discipline with the Commission. There 
is no evidence that her misconduct significantly harmed a child, the public, or the 
educational system. Although respondent denies the allegations against her, she did 
not demonstrate indifference to the seriousness and potential consequences of the 
misconduct. 
Praiseworthiness or Blameworthiness of Motives
34. Yelling at kindergarten students and moving them by force was not 
praiseworthy. However, as discussed above, it appears respondent only did so when 
the children were misbehaving or refusing to follow directions, and it never resulted in 
physical injury to a child. Moreover, some of the conduct occurred when Ms. Jimenez 
was observing respondent. Under those circumstances, it would be unreasonable to 
conclude respondent’s motive was to harm children. Rather, her behavior is consistent 
with her stated motive of redirecting children away from disruptive behavior. 
Likelihood of Recurrence 
35. Respondent is no longer employed at Heritage. As such, it is unlikely that 
she will encounter the students she taught there in an educational setting. However, 
the evidence at hearing established that respondent is prone to yelling at children who 
misbehave and to maintain order in the classroom, which she must learn to control if 
she is to continue teaching. 13 Chilling Effect
36. It is highly unlikely that disciplining respondent’s credential for the 
behavior proven at hearing will have a chilling effect on the constitutional rights of 
respondent or other educators. 
Publicity or Notoriety Given to Conduct 
37. There was no evidence introduced to establish that any publicity or 
notoriety was given to the allegations proven at hearing.
Conclusion 
38. When all the evidence is considered, complainant established respondent 
engaged in unprofessional conduct by yelling at kindergarten children and physically 
leading them by the wrist and arm. Complainant also established that the misconduct 
involved multiple acts of wrongdoing with several different children. However, that 
evidence alone is insufficient to conclude that respondent is clearly unsuitable to teach 
due to a fixed, non-remediable character trait, or that she engaged in immoral conduct 
or acts of moral turpitude. Complainant also failed to establish respondent’s 
misconduct significantly harmed a child trusted to her care, the public, or the 
educational system. 
39. Analysis of the factors described in indicates respondent’s 
conduct demonstrates an unfitness to teach and thus constitutes unprofessional 
conduct for purposes of disciplinary action under Education Code section 44421. 
However, respondent has been a teacher for over four decades and has no prior 
disciplinary record. The more serious allegations that she struck a child were not 
proven at hearing. Under these circumstances, revocation of respondent’s credential 14 would be unduly punitive. The purpose of an administrative disciplinary action is not 
to punish the licensee for her misconduct, but rather to ensure she does not exercise 
her license privileges in derogation of the public interest. (  (1979) 95 
Cal.App.3d 161, 164.) In this case, a public reproval is sufficient to protect the public 
health, safety, and welfare, and provide respondent notice that similar behavior in the 
future may result in further discipline.
LEGAL CONCLUSIONS 
1. Complainant bears the burden of proving the allegations in the 
Accusation by clear and convincing evidence to a reasonable certainty. (
(1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035.) Clear and 
convincing evidence requires proof that is so clear as to leave no substantial doubt 
and that is sufficiently strong to command the unhesitating assent of every reasonable 
mind. ( (2008) 169 Cal.App.4th 176, 190.)
2. Pursuant to the Education Code, commencing with Section 44000, and 
California Code of Regulations, title 5, commencing with Section 80000, the 
Commission is responsible for credentialing teachers in public schools in California, 
issuing credentials, and taking adverse action against applicants and credential 
holders.
3. Education Code section 44421 provides:
The Commission on Teacher Credentialing shall privately 
admonish, publicly reprove, revoke, or suspend for immoral 
or unprofessional conduct, or for persistent defiance of, and 
refusal to obey, the laws regulating the duties of persons 15 serving in the public school system, or for any cause that 
would have warranted the denial of an application for a 
credential or the renewal thereof, or for evident unfitness 
for service. 
4. Education Code section 44345 provides in part: 
The Commission may deny any application for the issuance 
of a credential or for the redenial of a credential made by 
an applicant who falls under any of the following 
categories: 
[¶] . . . [¶]
(e) Has committed any act involving moral turpitude. 
[¶] . . . [¶]
Any denial pursuant to subdivisions (a) to (e), inclusive, shall be based upon 
reasons related to the applicant’s fitness to teach or fitness to perform other duties 
which the credential would authorize the applicant to perform.
5. Moral turpitude has been described as “any crime or misconduct 
committed without excuse, or ‘any dishonest or immoral’ act not necessarily a crime.” 
( (1990) 224 Cal.App.3d 1016, 1017.) Moral turpitude 
has also been described as the “’general readiness to do evil.’ [Citation]” (
 (2009) 180 Cal.App.4th 447, 458.) 
6. Education Code section 44440, subdivision (b), provides: 16 The suspension or expiration of any credential, its surrender 
without the written consent of the commission, or a 
revocation pursuant to Section 44423 does not deprive the 
commission of its authority to do any of the following: 
(1) Institute or continue a disciplinary proceeding against 
the credential holder upon any ground provided by law. 
(2) Enter an order suspending or revoking the credential. 
(3) Issue a public reproval or private admonition to the 
credential holder.
7. California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 803000, states in part:
[¶] . . . [¶] 
(b) “Aggravating factor” is an event or circumstances which 
demonstrates that a greater degree of adverse action for 
an act of professional misconduct is needed to 
adequately protect the public, schoolchildren or the 
profession. Aggravating factors may include, but are not 
limited to, the following:
[¶] . . . [¶] 
(2) that the misconduct evidences multiple acts of 
wrongdoing or demonstrates a pattern of 
misconduct; 
[¶] . . . [¶] 17 (4) that the misconduct significantly harmed a child 
entrusted to the care of a credential holder or 
applicant, significantly harmed the public or the 
educational system. . . .
8. As set forth in Factual Finding 28, California Code of Regulations, title 5, 
section 80302, subdivision (a), identifies the factors to consider “to determine the 
relationship between the alleged misconduct and the applicant’s or holder’s fitness, 
competence, or ability to effectively perform the duties authorized by the credential.”
9. The California Supreme Court has recognized that the terms “immoral 
conduct” and “unprofessional conduct” substantially overlap one another and conduct 
that constitutes one often includes the other. ( , , 1 
Cal.3d 214, 221, fn. 9.) Additionally, in 
(2011) 194 Cal.App.4th 1454, the court explained: 
Moreover, the definition of immoral or unprofessional 
conduct must be considered in conjunction with the unique 
position of public school teachers, upon whom are imposed 
“responsibilities and limitations on freedom of action which 
do not exist in regard to other callings.” [Citation.]
(., at p. 1466.) 
10. Immoral conduct is sometimes considered as synonymous with 
“dishonesty” or a high degree of unfairness. (
 (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811.) The court explained in 
 (190) 9 Cal.App.3d 967, 972:18 The term “immoral” has been defined as that which is 
hostile to the welfare of the general public and contrary to 
good morals. Immorality includes conduct inconsistent with 
rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, 
dissoluteness; or as willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct 
showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable 
members of the community, and as an inconsiderate 
attitude toward good order and the public welfare. 
11. “Evident unfitness for service” means a teacher is clearly not fit, not 
adapted to or unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of temperamental defects 
or inadequacies. (
(1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444.) “Unlike ‘unprofessional conduct,’ 
‘evident unfitness for service’ connotes a fixed character trait, presumably not 
remediable merely on receipt of notice that one’s conduct fails to meet the 
expectations of the employing school district.” ( .) 
Cause for Discipline 
12. Based on the Factual Findings and Legal Conclusions as a whole, 
complainant proved by clear and convincing evidence that respondent yelled at the 
kindergarten students entrusted to her care and placed her hands on several children 
to physically move them by force. Consequently, cause exists to discipline 
respondent’s credential for unprofessional conduct pursuant to Education Code 
section 44421.
13. Based on the Factual Findings and Legal Conclusions as a whole, 
complainant did not prove by clear and convincing evidence that respondent is not fit, 19 not adapted to, or unsuitable to teach based on a fixed, non-remediable character 
trait. Consequently, cause does not exist to discipline respondent’s credential for 
evident unfitness for service pursuant to Education Code section 44421. 
14. Based on the Factual Findings and Legal Conclusions as a whole, 
complainant failed to prove by clear and convincing evidence that respondent 
engaged in conduct that is indecent, dishonest, depraved, or hostile to the public 
welfare. Consequently, cause does not exist to discipline respondent’s credential for 
immoral conduct pursuant to Education Code section 44421. 
15. Based on the Factual Findings and Legal Conclusions as a whole, 
complainant failed to prove by clear and convincing evidence that respondent 
engaged in conduct that is dishonest or immoral, or which evidences a general 
readiness to do evil. Consequently, cause does not exist to discipline respondent’s 
credential pursuant to Education Code for acts involving moral turpitude pursuant to 
Education Code sections 44421, and 44345, subdivision (e). 
Aggravating Factors 
16. Complainant proved by clear and convincing evidence that respondent’s 
unprofessional conduct evidenced multiple acts of wrongdoing involving multiple 
children. Complainant failed to prove by clear and convincing evidence that 
respondent’s unprofessional conduct significantly harmed a child trusted to her care, 
the public, or the educational system. 
Appropriate Discipline 
17. Considering the evidence, a public reproval is the most appropriate 
discipline in this case. A public reproval is “a warning from the Commission that 20conduct is not appropriate for a credential holder or applicant. Following a public 
reproval, commission of the same or similar misconduct may result in more serious 
adverse action. It is issued only when adequate to appropriately protect the public, 
schoolchildren and the profession.” (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80300, subd. (p).)
ORDER
Respondent Christine Deann Watte Beck is publicly reproved for unprofessional 
conduct.
DATE: October 1, 2024
MATTHEW S. BLOCK
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings
