BEFORE THE  
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING  
STATE OF CALIFORNIA  
In the Matter of  the Accusation Against : 
JON STERLING NEWSOM , Respondent  
Agency  Case No. 2 -466069248  
OAH No. 2024 110017  
PROPOSED DECISION  
Brian Weisel , Administrative Law Judge  (ALJ), Office of Administrative Hearings 
(OAH), State of California, heard this matter on April 30 through May 1,  2025, via 
videoconference from Sacramento , California . 
Steve J. Pyun, Deputy Attorney General, represented Mary Vixie Sandy, Ed.D . 
(complainant), Executive Director of the California Commission on Teacher 
Credentialing (Commission) . 
Joshua F. Richtel, Attorney at Law, represented respondent Jon Sterling 
Newsom, who was present throughout the hearing.  
Evidence  was received , the record closed , and the matter submitted for decision 
on May 1, 2025.  2 FACTUAL FINDINGS  
Jurisdictional Matters  
1. On May 25, 2017, the Commission issued respondent a Clear Single 
Subject Teaching Credential. The credential is schedule d to expire on June 1, 2027, 
unless renewed.  On November 1, 2018, the Commission issued respondent a Clear 
Career Technical Educational Teaching Credential. The credential is scheduled to expire 
on December 1, 2028, unless renewed.  
2. On February 19, 2014, the Commission issued respondent an Emergency 
30-Day Substitute Teaching Permit. The permit expired March 1, 2015. On February 25, 
2013, the Commission issued respondent a Waiver 30- Day Substitute Teaching Permit. 
The permit expired February 24, 2014.  
3. On July 7, 2015 , the Commission issued respondent a Single Subject 
Teaching Credential . The credential expired  August 1, 2020. On October 13, 2015, the 
Commission issued respondent a Preliminary Career Technical Educational Teaching 
Credential. The credential expired on November 1, 2018.  
4. On June 3, 2024, complaint, acting solely in her official capacity, sign ed 
and thereafter filed an Accusation seeking to discipline respondent’s credentials  and 
authorizations . Complainant  alleged respondent made several inappropriate contacts 
with student A.G. in 2022 . (Student  A.G.’s name is withheld to protect her privacy. All 
other students mentioned in the Accusation testified and did not request their names 
be withheld) . Complainant further allege d that those contacts constitute 
unprofessional conduct , immoral conduct, acts involving moral turpitude , and 
evidence of his unfitness for service . 3 5. Respondent ti mely  filed a Notice of Defense to the Accusation. The 
matter was set for an evidentiary hearing before an ALJ of OAH, pursuant to Education 
Code section 44246 and Government Code section 11500 et seq.  
Complainant’s Evidence  
DR. ANDREW BUKOSK Y’S TESTIMONY  
6. Andrew Bukosky , Ed.D ., is the Assistant Superintendent of Human 
Resources at Porterville Unified School District (PUSD) . In February of 2022, Dr. 
Bukosky  learned of allegations from four st udents from Porterville High School (PHS) 
stating respondent ha d inappropriate contact with student A.G. Dr. Bukosk y started an 
investigation with the  help of the principal of PHS, Jose Valdez. Dr. Buko sky informed 
respondent he would be on administrative leave during the investigation.  
7. Dr. Buko sky reviewed  written statements from the  students , which were 
admitted as administrative hearsay pursuant to Government Code section 11513, 
subdivision (d).  The statements collectively stated that respondent spent a 
disproportionate amount of his time and attention talking to student A.G. at the back 
of his classroom and in between periods outside his classroom door. Multiple students 
observed respondent sitting very close to student A.G. as they spoke. At times their legs would touch. A.G. also tou ched  respondent’s arm or move d the hair out of 
respondent’s  face. During the times respondent talked with A.G., other students were 
ignored. The students felt uncomfortable by respondent’s  conduct . 
8. PUSD staff informed local police of the alleged misconduct. Dr. Buko sky 
was aware the police questioned several students , including A.G. He is not aware of 
any criminal charges after the initial investigation.  The police investigation  and report  
were not offered into evidence.  4 9. Dr. Buko sky conducted an i nformal meeting  with respondent to discuss 
the results of the investigation . With Mr. Valdez, Dr. Bukosky  alerted respondent of the 
allegations. At that time, respondent was not formally disciplined. Dr. Bukosk y and Mr. 
Valdez “strongly suggested” that respondent cease any inappropriate interactions with 
students.  Respondent returned to work. His administrative leave lasted a few days.  
10. In the fall of 2022 , Dr. Buko sky learned of another incident involving 
respondent and inappropriate contact with A.G. On October 21, 2022, PHS  teacher 
Sarai Bravo informed PHS staff that she witnessed respondent give  A.G. a hug  outside 
his classroom after the late bell to return to class . Respondent  may have also kissed 
A.G. on the forehead, though Ms. Bravo was not sure . She provided a written 
statement to PUSD administration the same day . 
11. On October 24, 2022, Dr. Bukosky scheduled another meeting  with 
respondent. Dr. Bukosky informed respondent of Ms. Bravo’s allegation and placed 
respondent on leave effective the next day  while they conducted a second 
investigation. At th at meeting, respondent denied touching A.G.  
12. On November 7,  2022,  respondent attended another m eeting with PUSD 
administration . Dr. Bukosky notified respondent that PUSD possessed a video showing 
respondent  giving A.G. a hug and something that “looked like a kiss.” Respondent 
admitted he gave  A.G. “a side hug”  but denied ever kissing her.  
13. On November 14, 2022, PUSD formally disciplined respondent for 
violations of school policy related to his inappropriate contacts with A.G. PUSD issued 
a letter of reprimand and suspended respondent for 12 days. PUSD sent the notices of discipline to the Commission.  5 14. Respondent returned to work after his suspension. He continues to work 
at PHS. He has not been formally disciplined again since his suspension in November 
of 2022. Dr. Bukosky is not aware of respondent contacting A.G. outside of school or 
behind closed doors while at school.  
HANNAH MCCOY’S TESTIMONY  
15. Hannah McCoy is a s tudent at Cal ifornia  Polytechnic State  University , San 
Luis Obispo . She graduated from PHS  in 2023. Ms. McCoy attended respondent’s 
history class during Ms. McCoy’s junior year.  
16. Ms. McCoy was part of the “Pathways” program. In the program, students 
attended courses that doubled as college credit. Most of the courses were in the same 
wing of the school . Each of the Pathways classes were physically near  each other.  
17. In respondent’s history class, g uest lecturers from Porterville College  
provided most instruction after the first few weeks. When someone else gave the day’s 
lecture, respondent  “proctored” from his desk in the back of the room. The classes had 
significant  down time without direct instruction. During those times , students would 
do their work independently, talk to respondent, or go to other nearby classes in the 
Pathways program  to talk to other teachers or students.  
18. In February and March of 2022, Ms. McCoy witnessed some 
“questionable behavior” by respondent . The school hosted a domestic violence 
awareness event in the campus “quad” common area. Multiple students and teachers walked around the quad to various booths related to the e vent. Ms. McCoy and her 
friends saw respondent and A.G. walking among the exhibits together and “talking 
low” to one another . One of the booths handed out pins. Ms. McCoy stated that 
respondent and A.G. placed the pins on each other.  6 19. Most days, r espondent would talk  with student A.G. in the back area of 
the class near his desk , even when  A.G. did not have respondent’s class that period. 
A.G. frequently came over to talk to respondent during down time in her own class 
nearby. Ms. McCoy observed respondent and A.G. sitting with their legs very close 
together and sometimes touching. In one instance, Ms. McCoy saw A.G. run a closed 
pen across respondent’s knee. Ms. McCoy felt it was distracting. She also felt t hat 
respondent ignored other s tudents when he talked with A.G.  
20. Ms. McCoy took three photographs with her phone of A.G and 
respondent sitting close together at the back of the  class  by respondent’s desk . In the 
photos , respondent and A.G. are sitting facing the same direction with their knees 
touching or nearly touching. A.G. is holding  a closed pen on respondent’s knee while 
both are smiling.  
21. Ms. McCoy discussed her concerns with other students in her class. She 
confided in her  swim coach  for advice . Ms. McCoy  concluded it was best to report the 
incidents to school administration. She and her friends reported what they saw and 
gave their written statements. Ms. McCoy also gave a statement to police officers 
consistent with her written statement to PUSD.  
TESTIMONY OF OTHER PRIOR STUDENTS  
22. Antonio Arellano  took respondent’s class for the fall of the 2021- 2022 
school year. He was not in respondent’s class that spring. He noticed respondent and 
A.G. touching hand s, arm s, and face s or drawing on each other ’s hands  with a pen in 
the back of the classroom. He found the behavior “odd.”  
23. Mr. Arellano considered respondent a good teacher. He called 
respondent “wise. ” Respondent helped Mr. Arellano with financial tips as a soon-to -be 7 young adult. Respondent wrote a letter of recommendation on behalf of M r. Arellano 
to help him get into college the year after these incidents.  
24. Chanelle Millan  graduated from PHS  in 2023. She did not take 
respondent’s class. She did spend time in his class during lunchtime or breaks between 
periods. Ms. Millan saw respondent during the domestic violence event at the school 
quad. She observed respondent walking and whispering with A.G. Ms. Millan saw 
respondent place a pin on respondent’s sweater and whisper something. She did not 
hear what they were saying to each other. Ms. Millan stated that gossip circulated at 
the school about respondent and A.G. for months r elated to the time they spent 
talking with each other.  
25. Kymberly Rojas  also graduated from PHS  in 2023. Respondent taught Ms. 
Rojas’s  junior year history class. That class was not proctored like the Pathways college 
credit courses. Respondent taught the entire class himself. A.G. was not in Ms. Rojas’s 
history  class. A.G. would often come into respondent’s  class during downtimes in her 
other classes and talk with respondent at the back of the class near respondent’s  desk. 
Ms. Rojas also saw respondent and A.G.’s legs touching while they were talking. Ms. 
Rojas o bserved A.G. waiting outside respondent’s classroom to speak with him 
between periods frequently. Ms. Rojas stated that gossip about A.G. and respondent 
began circulating. After that began, respondent became more strict about students 
spending time in his class. Respondent stopped allowing students to “hang out” in his 
class during lunch or break perio ds. 
SARAI BRAVO ’S TESTIMONY  
26. Sarai Bravo teaches civics at PHS. She is the c hair of the social science 
department . She met respondent when she started at PHS in 2017. They have frequent 8 contact as they both teach in the same department. She reports no conflicts with 
respondent personally or professionally.  
27. Ms. Bravo was aware of general gossip about respondent and A.G. 
starting in February of 2022. She paid little attention to it as students often gossip. She had no reason to believe respondent engaged in any inappropriate conduct at that 
point.  
28. On October 21, 2022, Ms. Brav o walked in the courtyard shortly after the 
bell to return to class for seventh period and observed respondent give a “side hug” to 
A.G. outside his classroom. She also saw respondent bend down . Ms. Bravo believed 
respondent  may have kissed A.G. on the forehead. Ms. Bravo was not certain if he did 
kiss her. She still was “in complete shock.” She notified the principal’s  office and wrote 
a statement to memorialize what she saw. Ms. Bravo later gave a similar statement to a 
police  officer.  
29. Ms. Bravo asked administration if there was a video in the courtyard that 
captured the contact. At that time, staff told Ms. Bravo there was no video recording. 
At hearing, Ms. Bravo learned there was in fact a video recording of the incident . She 
viewed the video and confirmed that the two figures in the video were respondent and 
A.G. The video is very grainy and fuzzy. It is not possible to tell what exactly either 
person is doing in the recording.  After viewing the video, Ms. Bravo again stated she 
was n ot sure if respondent kissed A.G.’s forehead . She was sure respondent gave A.G. 
a side hug.  
JOSE VALDEZ ’S TESTIMONY  
30. Jose Valdez is the principal at PHS, where he has served for the last eight 
years. He conducted the March 2022 investigation into respondent’s conduct 9 regarding A.G . He asked  the students to write statements describing what they 
observed and why they believed it was inappropriate. He ultimately concluded that 
respondent’s behavior was “close to infringing on professional boundaries [expected] 
of teachers.” He also noted that b ecause of the attention he gave A.G., respondent 
ignored other students in his classes. Respondent’s behavior made some students 
uncomfortable.  
31. Mr. Valdez spoke with Ms. Bravo the day she reported the side hug and 
possible kiss outside respondent’s class in October of 2022. Mr. Valdez then met with 
respondent regarding those allegations. Mr. Valdez reminded respondent he should 
not have any contact with A.G. that could be seen as inappropriate or unprofessional. 
Mr. Valdez also suggested respondent stop allowing students to congregate in his 
class at lunch or between periods. Respondent denied any inappropriate contact with 
A.G. 
32. After completing their second investigation, PUSD disciplined respondent 
and suspended him for 12 days. A.G. also finished the school year studying at home. 
During the suspension, respondent emailed Mr. Valdez asking for clarification about 
what contact was appropriate with A.G. Mr. Valdez was surprised that he needed to 
instruct respondent what contact was appropriate. Mr. Valdez stated he told 
respondent not to contact A.G. during one of his meetings. He did not provide that 
instruction in any written dir ective.  
33. Mr. Valdez stated that all staff complete  an online training course  module  
to learn about appropriate boundaries, requirements of a mandated reporter, and student and teacher safety , among other topics . Respondent completed this course  
during his onboarding at PHS . Mr. Valdez stated that from that course , respondent 
should have known his contact crossed a line without further instruction.  10 34. In March of 2023, Mr. Valdez learned  respondent talked with A.G. again 
in the courtyard . Mr. Valdez reminded respondent in a meeting on March 24, 2023,  
that the “ optics ” of his conversations with A.G. were problematic. Mr. Valdez 
summarized the meeting in a subsequent email to respondent. Mr. Valdez told 
respondent speaking with A.G. outside the class “wasn’t a good idea” because of prior 
issues. Respondent told Mr. Valde z that A.G. was experiencing personal issues at 
home , and he was providing  her support.  In the email, Mr. Valdez told respondent he 
was “ not in any trouble.” After the meeting,  respondent agreed to stop communicating 
with A.G.  entirely.  Mr. Valdez is not aware of any contact since that time. Respondent 
has had no discipline subsequent to his October 2022 suspension. He continues to 
teach at PHS today.  
Respondent’s Evidence  
RESPONDENT ’S TESTIMONY  
35. Respondent  worked in various jobs before becoming a teacher. He sold 
cars and real estate for a time in Bakersfield, California. After having a child, he sought employment closer to home with a better work -life balance. His parents were both 
teachers. Respondent decided to obtain his master’s degree in education and apply for 
his teaching credential. Because of his prior background, respondent sought  
credentials to teach multiple subject s to help students who need direction after 
graduation . He has taught courses in finance, in dustrial  arts, marketing, and history.  
36. Respondent enjoy s PHS’s Pathways program. He advise s students on 
finance and career skills to help them prepare for adulthood . He encourage s students 
to obtain skills for gainful employment. Many of the classes in Pathways are dual enrollment with Porterville College. In respondent’s history class, this includ es 11 respondent teaching the first few and last few weeks of the course. C ollege lecturers 
teach  the remainder . When he is not the lecturer for a subject, respondent  proctor s 
the course and help s students with questions or homework from the back of the 
classroom near his desk.  
37. Many of the Pathways classrooms were in the same location in a pod 
together. These Pathways classes contained significant time without an active lecture. 
During those times students from his class and other classes traveled to other nearby 
classrooms to ta lk with other teachers or other students  or complete their work . The 
students were at times “stir crazy” and would “wander from here to there.”  
38. A.G. frequently came to respondent’s room during off time from her 
other classes.  Approximately six to eight other students also came to respondent’s 
classroom to talk to him during downtimes of other classes.  
39. In March of 2022, Dr. Bukosk y and Mr. Valdez met with respondent 
regarding alleg ations of  inappropriate contact with A.G. The district placed respondent 
on administrative leave for a few days while they conducted their investigation. 
Respondent was not formally disciplined at that time. Respondent stated he was not 
told to not contact A.G. at all at that time. He was, however, directed to cease 
inappropriate contact with A.G. After the  investigation, respondent decided to no 
longer allow students to congregate in his class during lunch or other b reaks. Instead, 
respondent  would stay outside the  door of his classroom in the courtyard between 
periods. Some students, including A.G., would talk with respondent  as he stood 
outside his classroom door.  
40. On October  21, 2022,  A.G. and another student came up to talk to 
respondent between sixth and seventh periods. The bell rang to return to class. 12 Respondent did not have a seventh period class. That was his scheduled prep aration  
hour. A.G. also did not have a seventh period class. Her school day was complete after 
sixth period. Respondent could tell A.G. was upset about something. He asked but she 
did not say what was bothering her. Respondent asked if she w as all right. S he shook 
her head to indicate no. She did not elaborate further.  
41. Respondent did not know what to do. He could tell A.G. was about to cry. 
Respondent did a “stupid thing” trying to comfort A.G. in the moment and gave A.G. a 
hug and a pat on her back for a few seconds. Respondent stated he did not kiss A.G.’s 
forehead. Respondent is approximately one  foot taller than A.G. He leaned down as a 
part of the hugging motion. A.G. then turned around and walked away . 
42. At the November 2022 meeting, PUSD informed respondent of his formal 
reprimand and  12-day suspension. Union representative Ryan Uphoff was also present . 
Dr. Bukosky  and Mr. Valdez asked respondent if he  kissed A.G., which he denied. They 
told him they had a video  of the incident , but that it was “grainy.” Respondent stated 
he was never  told that he could not have any contact with A.G. Mr. Valdez directed 
respondent to keep his contact appropriate and professional. Respondent considered 
those directives “vag ue.” 
43. Respondent’s contact with A.G. decreased after the October 2022 
incident. Respondent spoke with A.G. “maybe three or four times” afterwards . He told 
A.G. he was sorry and encouraged her to keep working toward college and a career.  
He ceased  all contact after March of 2023.  
44. Respondent discussed the photographs of him and A.G. sitting close 
together at the back of his class. He does not believe his legs ever touched A.G. At the 
time, he did not consider any of the contact inappropriate. He did not believe he 13 allowed A.G. to draw on him as he dresses in nice clothing at school that he would not 
want ruined. He never had contact with A.G. behind closed doors or outside of school.  
45. Respondent described the domestic violence awareness day in the quad. 
He did talk to A.G. He also talked with several other students throughout the event. 
Three to four full classes were in the quad at any given time. Respondent stated he did 
not say anything inappropriate to A.G. or anyone else. The event was loud with some 
people talking on speakers. He spoke close and low to people at the event to be heard 
over the loudspeaker. Respondent remembered people handed out pins at the event. 
Respondent does no t remember placing a pin on A.G. or her placing one on him.  
46. Respondent stated he did talk to A.G. more than other students. She 
experienced some personal problems at home. A.G.  spoke with respondent  about her 
personal issues at times. Respondent  encouraged A.G. to continue her education so 
she could “get out” of Porterville and provide a stable life for herself as an adult. 
Respondent tried to help all his students and “meet them on a personal level.” 
Respondent stated he understands the optics of allowing A.G. to sit so close to him 
and spend so much time with him were problematic . Respondent stated he would not 
allow that close of contact again.  
RYAN UPHOFF ’S TESTIMONY  
47. Ryan Uphoff is the athletic director of Strathmore High School in  the 
PUSD. Previously, he was president of the union for all certificated teachers at PUSD. In 
October of 2022, PUSD contacted Mr. Uphoff to notify him of possible adverse action 
related to respondent’s employment. Mr. Uphoff attended the two  meeting s in 
October and November 2022 related to  PUSD’s investigation.  14 48. Mr. Uphoff did not know respondent prior to the investigation. Mr. 
Uphoff is aware some rumors have circulated regarding respondent’s inappropriate 
contact with one or more students. Mr. Uphoff did not recall the specifics of the 
meeting. He did recall that respondent denied ever touching A.G.  
ANTHONY WHITTON ’S TESTIMONY  
49. Anthony Whitton is a freshman at Porterville College. He graduated from 
Porterville High School in May of 2024. Mr. Whitton took respondent’s class in the 
2022- 2023 school year for history.  
50. Mr. Whitton testified that respondent stood outside his classroom 
between periods frequently. Respondent’s classroom was a common “hangout” for students between period s or when there was downtime at other classrooms in the 
Pathways program.  
51. Mr. Whitton would travel to respondent’s class during downtime of other 
classes. He would speak with respondent in the back of the classroom. They would discuss both school -related and personal topics.  
52. Mr. Whitton viewed respondent as a mentor. He characterized 
respondent as “honest ” and “ highly respected. ” Mr. Whitton sought respondent’s 
guidance on whether to attend college and tips for financial success as an adult. When 
Mr. Whitton graduated, respondent hugged him and congratulated him. Mr. Whitton 
did not consider the contact inappropriate.  
53. Mr. Whitton did not hear general gossip about respondent during 2022 
or otherwise. Mr. Whitton witnessed respondent outside his classroom door with A.G. 
during break once. A.G.  was waiting at respondent’s  door to talk to him. Mr. Whitton 15 did not hear what they were saying. He did not see anything inappropriate outside 
respondent’s classroom door.  
Analysis  
UNPROFESSIONAL CONDUCT  
54. Complainant  proved by clear and convincing evidence that respondent’s 
actions considered together were unprofessional. Multiple witnesses credibly provided 
consistent accounts of respondent  sitting too close to A.G. He touched or allowed 
himself to be touched by A.G. on the arm, face, or leg in ways that warranted  concern.  
Respondent and A.G. placed pins on each other.  Respondent’s claim he did not 
remember if they did place pins on each other was not credible. Respondent  
whispered and joked with student A. G. He gave her  disproportionate attention beyond 
that necessary in a student- teacher relationship.  At least some of these contacts 
occurred  when A.G. was not even a student in that period.  
55. There is no dispute respondent hugged A.G. in the courtyard. A hug may 
not necessarily be inappropriate in some circumstances, such as at Mr. Whitton’s graduation ceremony. However, respondent’s numerous other unprofessional contacts 
with A.G. indicate the  hug was more than what is required of a supportive teacher.  
56. The evidence did not support a finding that respondent kissed A.G. The 
video is of such poor quality nothing  can be discerned of it. Ms. Bravo admitted she 
was not sure if she saw a kiss. The other inappropriate contacts above, however, were unprofessional.  16 57. Respondent’s multiple unprofessional contacts with A.G. continued to 
cross the teacher -student boundary . Respondent  took his attention away from his 
other students and created a distraction and an uncomfortable  learning environment . 
OTHER CAUSES FOR DISCIPLINE  
58. Complainant did not prove by clear and convincing evidence that 
respondent’s action s constituted moral turpitude. “Moral turpitude” has been defined 
as “everything done contrary to justice, honesty, modesty or good morals.” ( Rice v. 
Alcoholic Beverage Appeals Bd.  (1979) 89 Cal.App.3d 30, 36.) An act involves moral 
turpitude if it involves a serious breach of a duty owed to another or to society. ( In re 
Stuart K. Lesansky  (2001) 25 Cal.4th 11, 16.)  
59. Though multiple witnesses discussed giving statements to the police, 
there is no police report in evidence. The findings of police officers were not offered 
and are not considered. A.G. did not testify. There is no evidence of text message exchanges or pho ne calls or any  contact between respondent and A.G. outside of 
school. Every  act of  unprofessional contact occurred either in respondent’s class in 
front  of other students or  in the public courtyard. Respondent’s actions were 
inappropriate and unprofession al. However, little  evidence was presented to support 
the conclusion that respondent ’s actions r ose to the level of moral turpitude. Moral 
turpitude i s conduct that is much more serious than just inappropriate or 
unprofessional. The evidence presented at hearing does not support a finding that 
respondent acted contrary to justice, honesty, modesty, or good morals.  
60. Further, c omplainant did not prove by clear and convincing evidence 
respondent  is unfit for service. “Evident unfitness for service” means a teacher is clearly 
not fit, not adapted to or unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of 17 temperamental defects or inadequacies. ( Woodland Joint Unified School Dist. v. Com. 
on Professional Competence  (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444.) “Unlike ‘unprofessional 
conduct,’ ‘evident unfitness for service’ connotes a fixed character trait, presumably 
not remediable merely on receipt of notice that one’s conduct fails to meet the 
expectations of the employing school district.” ( Ibid.) 
61. No evidence was presented that respondent possesses some fixed 
character trait that is not remediable. The evidence indicates the opposite. After respondent’s district discipline in October of 2022, his contact with A.G. decreased 
from near daily communication to three or four  times ever again . He continues to 
teach at PHS with no formal discipline after the incident. He changed his behavior at school both by  closing his classroom during breaks and ending his practice of being 
too familiar with students . Notably, Mr. Arellano  sought respondent’s recommendation 
letter for college a year after the incident s with student A.G . He credibly testified that 
respondent was a good teacher that provided mentorship to students. Mr. Whitton similarly testified about respondent’s influence helping him attend college and 
becom e a young adult.  
62. Finally, complainant  did not prove by clear and convincing evidence  that 
respondent’s conduct was immoral. The term “immoral” has been defined generally as 
“that which is hostile to the welfare of the general public and contrary to good morals. 
. . . [It] includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, 
indecency, depravity, dissoluten ess; or as willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct 
showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the community, 
and as an inco nsiderate attitude toward good order and the public welfare.” (
Bd. of Ed. 
of San Francisco Unified School Dist. v. Weiland  (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811.)  As 18 discussed above, respondent’s conduct was unprofessional. Complainant provided no 
evidence why that conduct is  depraved, flagrant, or shameless.  
FITNESS TO TEACH  
63. In Morrison v. State Board of Education  (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, 235 
(Morrison ), the California Supreme Court held that “an individual can be removed from 
the teaching profession only upon a showing that his retention in the profession poses 
a significant danger of harm to either students, school employees, or others who 
might be aff ected by his actions as a teacher.” The court concluded that a teacher’s 
conduct cannot abstractly be characterized as “immoral,” “unprofessional,” or 
“involving moral turpitude” un less the conduct indicated that a teacher is unfit to 
teach. (Id. at p. 229.)  
64. The Court outlined factors to consider when determining whether an 
educator’s conduct demonstrates unfitness to teach, which have been codified in California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80302, subdivision (a). The criteria are as 
follows: (1) the  likelihood of adverse effects on students, fellow teachers, or the 
educational community; (2) the proximity or remoteness in time of the misconduct; (3) 
the type of credential held by respondent; (4) extenuating or aggravating 
circumstances; (5) praisewor thiness or blameworthiness of motives; (6) likelihood of 
recurrence; (7) the extent to which disciplinary action may chill or have an adverse 
impact upon the exercise of constitutional rights among teachers or other persons 
involved; and (8) the publicity or notoriety of respondent’s misconduct.  
65. In evaluating the 
Morrison  factors, only the pertinent factors need to be 
analyzed. ( Broney v. California Com . on Teacher Credentialing (2010)  108 Cal.App.4th 
462, 476.) In addition, the reviewing body is not bound by “rigid procedure.” Rather, it 19 may apply the Morrison  factors in the aggregate, and consider the totality of a 
teacher’s offensive conduct. ( Woodland Joint Unified School Dist . v. Commission on 
Professional Competence  (1992) 2 Cal.App.4 th 1429, 1457 [Commission does not have 
to show that “every charge in the series would independently justify” adverse action].)  
66. Considering the relevant Morrison  factors, respondent’s conduct had an 
adverse effect on multiple students at PHS. He ignored other students when he spent 
considerable time and attention away from his class to talk with A.G.  At times , A.G. was 
not even a student in that period. Re spondent ‘s misconduct occurred in 2022, which is 
recent. Responden t credibly described his motive to help a student enduring a difficult 
personal time. Though his contact was excessive and unprofessional, there is nothing particula rly blameworthy regarding his motives. Respondent is not likely to reoffend. 
Once the district disciplined respondent, h e significantly  decreased and later  ceased all 
contact with A.G. He has not been disciplined again by PUS D. He continues to teach at 
PHS. At least one student reported respondent as mentor and a role model in the year after the allegations. Respondent’s actions created modest publicity. The entire school 
gossiped about respondent’s interactions with A.G. This made the learning environment uncomfortable for at least some students. There is no evidence 
disciplining respondent’s credentials would have an adverse impact on the 
constitutional rights of others.  
EXTENUATING OR AGGRAVATING CIRCUMSTANCES  
67. The Commission’s regulations define “aggravating factor” as “an event or 
circumstance which demonstrates that a greater degree of adverse action for an act of 
professional misconduct is needed to adequately protect the public, schoolchildren or 
the profess ion.” (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80300, subd. (b).) The definition includes six 
examples:  (1) a prior record of adverse action including the nature and extent of that 20 record;  (2) that the misconduct evidences multiple acts of wrongdoing or demonstrate 
a pattern of misconduct;  (3) that the misconduct was surrounded by or followed by 
bad faith, dishonesty or other violation of the laws governing educators;  (4) that the 
misconduct significantly harmed a child entrusted to the care of a credential holder or 
applicant, significantly harmed the public or the educational system;  (5) that the holder 
or applicant demonstrated indifference toward the consequence of the misconduct, 
which includes failure to comply with known court orders; or  (6) that the holder or 
applicant had prior notice, warnings or reprimands for similar conduct from any 
reliable source.  
68. The r egulations define “mitigating factor” as “an event or circumstance 
which demonstrates that the public, schoolchildren and the profession would be 
adequately protected by a more lenient degree of adverse action or no adverse action 
whatsoever.” (Cal. Code R egs., tit. 5, § 80300, subd. (m).) The definition includes seven 
examples: (1) absence of any prior record of adverse action over many years of 
educational service, coupled with present misconduct which is not deemed most 
serious; (2) lack of harm to the person who is the object of the misconduct; (3) 
emotional or physical difficulties suffered by the holder or applicant which 
substantially contributed to the misconduct; provided that the difficulties were not the 
product of illegal conduct by the cred ential holder or applicant, such as illegal drug or 
substance abuse; and further provided that the credential holder or applicant has 
established through clear and convincing evidence that he or she no longer has such 
difficulties; (4) a demonstration of g ood character of the applicant or holder attested 
to by references from the educational community or the general community from 
individuals aware of the extent of the applicant's or holder's misconduct; (5) objective 
action taken by the applicant or holder , spontaneously demonstrating remorse at the 
time of the misconduct, and recognition of the wrongdoing which is designed to 21 timely make amends for the consequences of the misconduct; (6) the proximity or 
remoteness in time relative to the seriousness of the misconduct; or (7) the nature and 
extent of subsequent rehabilitation.  
69. Here, the evidence established that respondent engaged in multiple acts 
of wrongdoing. His conduct is relatively recent. Respondent was warned to keep his 
conduct professional in March of 2022 before hugging A.G.  in October of 2022. Since 
that time , there is no evidence of further unprofessional contact with A.G. There is no 
evidence respondent acted in bad faith or significantly harmed A.G., the public, or the 
educational system. Respondent was disciplined by PUSD for the same conduct. He 
has no prior disc ipline with the Commission  in approximately ten years . A former 
student credibly testified that respondent was a mentor and a competent teacher  
during and after the misconduct . 
APPROPRIATE DISCIPLINE  
70. When all the Morrison  factors and the aggravating and mitigating factors 
are considered , revocation or a lengthy suspension of respondent’s credential are  not 
warranted  to protect the public. Respondent violated a seri es of teacher -student 
boundaries. However, there is no evidence respondent harmed A.G. There is no 
evidence of any inappropriate contact other than conversations and brief public 
physical contact  at school . Respondent should have understood the optics of his 
contact s sooner . Once he was formal ly disciplined for his misconduct , he significantly 
decreased and then ceased all contact with A.G.  Respondent  has continued to teach at 
PHS for over two years without further discipline.  
71. Similarly, a short suspension would do little to protect students or the 
educational system as a whole . Respondent already served a 12- day suspension for his 22 unprofessional conduct. Though the Commission is not bound by the actions of a 
school  district, suspending respondent’s credential again for a similar amount of time 
would do little to ensure he does not reoffend. As stated above, respondent took the 
district’s discipline seriously. He changed his behavior and returned to the classroom 
with a better understanding of appropriate behavior. Since that time, other students 
sought respondent out as a mentor, including one of the students that reported the 
miscon duct.  
72. The appropriate discipline then is to publicly reprove respondent ’s 
credentials . Such public reproval serves the interests of public protection because it 
will constitute an “adverse action” and thus can be considered as prior discipline in the 
event respondent engages in future misconduct. Furthermore, a public reproval 
balances the  Commission’s interest in regulating its credential holders  with 
consideration of the mitigating factors present here.  
LEGAL CONCLUSIONS  
Burden of Proof  
1. Complainant  has the burden of proving cause for adverse action by clear 
and convincing evidence to a reasonable certainty. ( Ettinger v. Bd. of Medical Quality 
Assurance  (1982) 135 Cal.App.3d 583, 855 –856.) Clear and convincing evidence 
requires proof that is so clear as to leave no substantial doubt and that is sufficiently 
strong to command the unhesitating assent of every reasonable mind. ( In re Marriage 
of Brooks  (2008) 169 Cal.App.4th 176, 190 .) 23 Jurisdiction and Applicable Law  
2. Pursuant to Education Code section 44000 et seq., and California Code of 
Regulations, title 5, commencing with section 80001, the Commission is responsible 
for credentialing teachers in public schools in California, including issuing credentials, 
and takin g adverse action against applicants and credential holders.  
3. Education Code s ection 44421 authorizes the Commission to take 
adverse action against an individual’s teaching credential for, among other specified causes, unprofessional conduct, evident unfitness for service, immoral conduct, acts of 
moral turpitude, or for any cause that  would warrant denial of an application for a 
credential. Section 44345, subdivision (e), allows the Commission to deny an 
application of one who has committed an act involving moral turpitude . 
Causes for Discipline  
4. The Commission may discipline a credential for unprofessional conduct. 
(Ed. Code, § 44421.) As discussed in the Factual Findings above, complainant proved 
by clear and convincing evidence that respondent engaged in unprofessional conduct when he  spent an inappropriate amount of hi s time talking with and briefly touching  
student A.G . The volume and extent of his attention harmed the learning environment 
at PHS and made multiple students uncomfortable. Cause therefore exists to discipline 
respondent’s credentials pursuant to Education Code section 44421.  
5. The Commission may discipline a credential “for any cause that would 
have warranted the denial of an application for a credential or the renewal thereof.” (Ed. Code, § 44421.) An application for a credential may be denied if the applicant “has 
committed an y act involving moral turpitude.” (Ed. Code, § 44345, subd. (e).)  As 
discussed  in the Factual Findings above , complainant did not prove by clear and 24 convincing evidence that respondent’s conduct constituted moral turpitude. Cause 
therefore does not exist to discipline his  credential s for committing an act involving 
moral turpitude pursuant to Education Code sections 44421 and 44345, subdivision 
(e). 
6. The Commission may discipline a credential for immoral conduct. (Ed. 
Code, § 44421.) As discussed in the Factual Findings above,  complainant did not prove 
by clear and convincing evidence that respondent’s conduct was immoral. Cause 
therefore does not exist to discipline his credentials  for immoral conduct pursuant to 
Education Code section 44421.  
7. The Commission may discipline a credential based on the holder’s 
evident unfitn ess for service. (Ed. Code, § 44421.) As discussed in the Factual Findings 
above,  complainant did not prove by clear and convincing evidence that respondent 
demonstrated evident unfitness for service. Cause therefore does not exist to discipline 
his credentials  for evident unfitness for service pursuant to Education Code section 
44421.  
// 
// 
// 
// 25 ORDER  
Respondent Jon Sterling Newsom’s Clear Single Subject Teaching Credential , 
Clear Career Technical Education Teaching Credential, Preliminary Single Subject 
Teaching Credential, Preliminary Career Technical Education Teaching Credential, 
Emergency 30- Day Substitute Teaching Permit, and Waiver 30- Day Substitute 
Teaching Permit  are PUBLICLY REPROVED pursuant to Ed ucation Code section 44421 . 
 
DATE:  May 28, 2025  
BRIAN WEISEL  
Administrative Law Judge  
Office of Administrative Hearings  
 
Brian Weisel (May 28, 2025 13:43 PDT)Brian Weisel