BEFORE THE 
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING 
STATE OF CALIFORNIA 
In the Matter of the Accusation Against: 
CAMERON JOSEPH DUGGAN, Respondent 
Agency Case No. 2-166015728 
OAH No. 2024010278 
PROPOSED DECISION 
Patrice De Guzman Huber, Administrative Law Judge (ALJ), Office of 
Administrative Hearings (OAH), State of California, heard this matter by 
videoconference on May 28 through 29, 2024, from Sacramento, California. 
Malissa N. Siemantel, Deputy Attorney General, represented complainant Mary 
Vixie Sandy, Ed.D., Executive Director of the California Commission on Teacher 
Credentialing (Commission), State of California.
Emily J. Power, Esq., represented respondent Cameron Joseph Duggan, who 
appeared. 
Evidence was received, the record closed, and the matter submitted for decision 
on May 29, 2024. 2 FACTUAL FINDINGS
Jurisdictional Matters 
1. On February 14, 2007, the Commission issued respondent a Certificate of 
Clearance (certificate). The certificate expired on March 1, 2012. The Commission may 
discipline an expired certificate. (Ed. Code, § 44440, subd. (b).) 
2. On January 2, 2009, the Commission issued respondent a Preliminary 
Single Subject Teaching Credential (preliminary credential). The preliminary credential 
expired on February 1, 2014. The Commission may discipline an expired preliminary 
credential. (Ed. Code, § 44440, subd. (b).) 
3. On July 27, 2010, the Commission issued respondent a Clear Single 
Subject Teaching Credential (teaching credential). The teaching credential will expire 
on August 1, 2025, unless renewed or revoked. 
4. On February 23, 2022, complainant, in her official capacity, signed and 
thereafter filed an Accusation. Complainant seeks to revoke all credentials, certificates, 
and authorizations issued to respondent based on his alleged unprofessional conduct, 
immoral conduct, and conduct involving moral turpitude, pursuant to Education Code 
sections 44345, subdivision (e), and 44421. 
Generally, complainant alleged, in December 2020, respondent was convicted of 
driving with a blood alcohol content (BAC) of 0.08 percent or more and admitted 
sentencing enhancements for having a BAC of 0.20 percent or more and having minors 
in the vehicle. In aggravation, complainant alleged respondent’s misconduct evidences 
multiple acts of wrongdoing or demonstrates a pattern of misconduct, and his 
misconduct was surrounded or followed by bad faith, dishonesty, or other violation of 3 the laws governing educators. Complainant further alleged respondent’s misconduct 
significantly harmed a child entrusted to him, the public, or the educational system. 
5. Respondent timely filed a Notice of Defense and request for hearing. The 
matter was set for an evidentiary hearing before an ALJ of the OAH pursuant to 
Education Code section 44246 and Government Code section 11500 et seq. 
Criminal Conviction 
6. On December 16, 2020, in Sacramento County Superior Court, Case No. 
20MI013707, respondent was convicted on a no contest plea of violating Vehicle Code 
section 23152, driving with a BAC of 0.08 percent or more (DUI), a misdemeanor. 
Respondent admitted sentencing enhancements for driving with a BAC of 0.20 percent 
or more and for having minors under 14 years of age in the vehicle, in violation of 
Vehicle Code sections 23538, subdivision (b)(2), and 23572, respectively. The court 
suspended imposition of sentence and placed respondent on three years of informal 
probation, with terms and conditions that required him to serve 32 days in jail, 
complete a nine-month DUI program, and pay fines, fees, and restitution. Respondent 
has satisfied his criminal sentence, and informal probation terminated in December 
2023.
7. The circumstances underlying the conviction occurred on August 26, 
2020. Folsom Police Department officers responded to a report of an intoxicated man 
in the parking lot of a restaurant. When the officers arrived at the parking lot, a witness 
pointed out respondent, who matched the reporting party’s description. The officers 
located respondent sitting in the driver's seat of his parked vehicle. The engine was 
running. Respondent's three children, aged 3, 5, and 10, were also in the vehicle. 4 Respondent smelled of alcohol, had bloodshot and watery eyes, and slurred his 
speech. He agreed to a blood test, which measured his BAC at 0.25 percent. 
Respondent’s Evidence 
8. Respondent has been teaching at Argonaut High School (Argonaut) in 
Jackson, California, since January 2009 and coaching sports since 2010. Respondent 
coaches cross country and teaches 10th grade English, 12th grade Advanced 
Placement (AP) English, and English Language Development for 9th through 12th 
grades. He and another English teacher, Matthew Gough, serve alternating terms as 
the English Department Chair. Argonaut administration knows about respondent’s
conviction. Apart from prohibiting him from driving the school van to transport 
students, administration did not formally discipline respondent in any way. 
9. At hearing, respondent admitted his conviction. Between March 5, 2021, 
and March 20, 2021, he took a brief leave of absence to serve his jail term through 
home detention and an ankle monitor. Respondent did not tell any of his students 
about his DUI conviction or the underlying circumstances. After completing the jail 
term, respondent returned to work. He has also paid all fines, fees, and restitution. 
10. Respondent completed a three-month DUI class through Safety Center, 
Incorporated (Safety Center), a provider serving individuals ordered by the court to 
complete a DUI class. Upon review of respondent’s probation terms, Safety Center 
enrolled him in its three-month DUI class. After respondent completed the class, Safety 
Center sent his proof of completion to the court. Although the court had ordered a 
nine-month DUI class, it appeared satisfied with respondent's completion of the three-
month class. Informal probation ended in December 2023, without incident or any 
probation violations. Respondent has no other convictions. 5 11. Respondent acknowledged he is an alcoholic and has struggled with 
alcohol for years. In 2013 or 2014, thinking sobriety may help his struggling marriage, 
respondent attempted to become sober. He attended Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) 
meetings and stayed sober for about one year. In that time, his marriage improved, 
and respondent relaxed his attitude toward sobriety. He stopped regularly attending 
AA meetings and began occasionally consuming alcohol. 
12. A short time before the DUI, respondent discovered his wife had an 
extramarital relationship. In his letter to the Committee of Credentials, respondent 
admitted, “I am responsible for not using the tools I know to help myself. Instead of 
scheduling therapy, asking for space, writing out my frustrations, finding positive 
social interaction, etc[.], I grew bitter.” He began increasing his consumption of 
alcohol. 
13. The morning of August 26, 2020, respondent knew he needed to drive 
his children to a dental appointment about 30 miles away. Even so, between 10:00 a.m. 
and noon, he consumed approximately eight "drinks" of wine and vodka. He estimated 
a "drink" would have been a wine glass, if wine, or a shot glass, if vodka. At around 
12:30 p.m., respondent drove his children from their home to the dentist's office. After 
the appointment, he drove them to the restaurant to eat. He and the children ate 
inside the vehicle. Respondent drank two beers with his food. 
14. In hindsight, respondent reflected, “I made the horrible and 
unforgiveable choice to put myself and my children at risk and my freedom and future 
in jeopardy.” Respondent realized staying in his marriage and continuing to associate 
with friends who enable and encourage his drinking would trigger him to continue 
consuming alcohol. He immediately separated from his wife and stopped associating 
with drinking friends. He moved in with his mother to focus on his recovery. After five 6 months, in January 2021, respondent moved to a house he owned which had 
previously been occupied by renters. He is now divorced. He has not consumed 
alcohol since the day of the DUI. 
15. Although not required by the court, respondent immediately began 
attending AA meetings again. He averaged one AA meeting per day in the first three 
months of his sobriety. He has maintained a relationship with his AA sponsor since 
October 2020. He served as AA secretary in 2020 and 2021 and was in charge of a 
specific meeting per week. 
16. Respondent has completed AA’s 12 steps but is continually on steps 10, 
11, and 12, which AA members collectively call the “maintenance steps.” These steps 
are, respectively: taking inventory of oneself, prayer and meditation, and practicing the 
AA principles in all aspects of one's life. Respondent testified he thinks about these 
steps as he prepares for each day. 
17. Step 10, taking inventory of himself, has changed respondent’s outlook. 
Reflecting on his life, respondent testified he could see how being in denial and 
making excuses kept him in a cycle of addiction and stress. Because he did not want to 
admit his alcoholism to himself or anyone else, he used to hide how much alcohol he 
consumed, and he made excuses such as, "Everybody does it. We drink when we're 
happy. We drink when we're sad. Drinking is part of life." Hiding his addiction to 
maintain a facade was an additional stressor in respondent's life, which triggered him 
to continue consuming alcohol and to isolate himself. After the DUI incident, he 
decided to finally be honest with himself and his family and friends and has now come 
to appreciate the label “alcoholic.” He testified, now, by admitting the label, "I know 
who I am." Being honest has allowed respondent to see himself critically and, 
consequently, see how he can improve. 7 18. Step 11, prayer and meditation, also improved respondent’s life. His faith 
is a now a forefront part of his life. He begins each day in prayer and reflection on how 
to approach the new day.
19. Step 12, practicing the AA principles in all aspects of life, particularly in 
serving others, has been transformative for respondent. He testified, “Helping others 
takes me out of myself.” Where he would have isolated himself in the past and 
wallowed in life’s difficulties, now, respondent expends that energy toward his 
community. He founded a local running club to support those who want to learn or 
continue running. As a cross country coach and runner himself, respondent helps train 
the running club members to improve both their statistics and health. In addition to 
mentoring runners in the community, in the last few years, respondent has also been 
mentoring new teachers through the Sacramento County Office of Education’s mentor 
teacher program. 
20. Respondent also expends his energy teaching his students. He is 
especially proud of his performance and the achievements of his 12th grade AP 
English students. When he first began teaching that class in 2019, only 50 percent of 
students passed the AP English exam. In the school year 2022-2023, respondent’s 
students’ pass rate improved to 85 percent. Most recently, in the school year 2023-
2024, his students’ pass rate was 100 percent. Respondent testified a perfect pass rate 
is unheard of. Respondent’s community has taken note of his teaching performance. 
Within the last few years, , a local newspaper, honored him as 
the “best teacher” in Amador County. Recently, Amador County Unified School District 
began a new annual award, the “challenge coin,” for each school in the district to 
present to select educators whose performance and impact it wants to recognize. A 8 year or two ago, Argonaut Principal Troy Gassaway recognized respondent with the 
“challenge coin.” 
21. In addition to AA’s "maintenance steps," respondent also continually 
works on step 8, making amends. For him, “making amends is a living thing,” not a 
one-time apology. In his letter to the Committee of Credentials, respondent wrote, “I 
put the safety and lives of my children at risk, and I will bear that shame my whole 
life.” He has apologized to his children for his conduct but feels compelled to continue 
making amends. To that end, he voluntarily attended parenting classes to learn how to 
become a better parent and how to co-parent well with his ex-wife, with whom he has 
joint custody. 
22. Respondent makes “living” amends by being present and open with his 
three children, as well as his current partner’s 15-year-old daughter. To be present and 
open, he is involved in the children's studies and their interests. He assigns household 
chores and supports their extracurricular activities so they can practice responsibility. 
When the children encounter an issue in their daily lives, respondent’s practice is to 
speak to them candidly to help them understand the problem, learn to be patient and 
gracious with themselves, and figure out potential solutions. Respondent wants to 
teach them no one is perfect and failure is part of life, but they have autonomy over 
their lives and choices, and they have the support of their family and community. 
23. In addition to AA and the parenting classes, respondent has also pursued 
therapy. Between 2010 and 2016, he regularly saw a therapist in Elk Grove, California, 
approximately one hour away from his home. He stopped attending due to parental 
responsibilities, cost, and time. In hindsight, respondent suspects he felt comfortable 
stopping because he "felt like [he] was fixed." Now, respondent sees he was not "fixed” 
and at the time not ready to fully receive or grasp the lessons from therapy. He has 9 again begun therapy, this time online. He feels the lessons make more sense this time 
around. 
24. Respondent has also found pursuing his health therapeutic. His running 
club and coaching keep him physically active and healthy. In addition, setting and 
meeting running goals, such as competing in a 100-mile race, give respondent metrics 
by which he can measure healthful progress. Being able to observe his progress and 
improvements has helped respondent maintain a positive outlook in life. He testified it 
is no longer an option to ever return to his maladapted, addicted, and harmful way of 
living. 
TESTIMONY ,LETTERS, AND PERFORMANCE EVALUATIONS BY COLLEAGUES
25. Five of respondent’s colleagues testified: Principal Gassaway, Mr. Gough, 
Shannon Clark, Teresa Floyd, and Jennifer Putnam. Each colleague knew about 
respondent’s DUI and the underlying circumstances.
26. Principal Gassaway was Argonaut’s principal from 2017 to 2023 and, in 
that capacity, directly supervised respondent. In 2018, he evaluated respondent’s 
performance. He noted respondent “facilitates experiences that promote autonomy, 
interaction[,] and choice.” Respondent “appealed to students[‘] higher intellect by 
asking questions that promoted a greater depth of knowledge.” Principal Gassaway 
noted respondent’s “noticeable interest in his student[s’] well[-]being that extends 
beyond the walls of his classroom.” In 2021, Principal Gassaway again evaluated 
respondent’s performance and rated it as “satisfactory.”
27. Also in 2021, Principal Gassaway wrote a letter to the Committee of 
Credentials to support respondent, and he testified consistently with his letter. In 
almost 14 years in school administration, Principal Gassaway considers respondent 10 “the most effective teacher [he has] ever had the pleasure to be associated with,” and 
he was pleased to award respondent with the “challenge coin” award. More recently, 
Principal Gassaway was especially impressed by the 100 percent pass rate of 
respondent’s 12th grade AP English students. Based on his observations, Principal 
Gassaway believes the DUI and the underlying circumstances are not representative of 
respondent’s character as a whole. Principal Gassaway opined respondent’s character 
is more accurately represented by his teaching acumen and consistent efforts in 
supporting students and their academic excellence and “emotional wellness.” 
28. Mr. Gough is an English teacher at Argonaut. While respondent teaches 
10th and 12th grades, Mr. Gough teaches 9th and 11th grades. He and respondent 
alternate terms as the Chair of the English Department. Mr. Gough is currently Chair. 
The Chair develops benchmarks and teaching standards to ensure uniformity 
throughout the grades. Mr. Gough has personally seen the positive impact of 
respondent’s teaching on the students he sees in alternating years. According to 
Mr. Gough, respondent’s passion for teaching and performance “sharpens [his] own 
teaching skill.” He considers respondent an asset to the students and the teaching 
community. 
29. Ms. Clark is a biology teacher and has been teaching at Argonaut for 15 
years. Over the years, Ms. Clark and respondent have become friends. They socialize 
outside of school approximately once a month. Ms. Clark has observed respondent 
decline to consume alcohol at dinner. She has not seen him drink since before the DUI. 
Ms. Clark described respondent as compassionate with students. He collaborates with 
other educators and is “always looking for ways to improve” to ultimately benefit the 
students. Respondent has taught Ms. Clark’s children, and, as a parent, she considers 
respondent a good teacher. 11 30. Ms. Floyd is an English teacher and has been teaching at Argonaut for 
over 15 years. Over the years, Ms. Floyd and respondent have become friends, and 
they socialize outside of school approximately once a month. Ms. Floyd has not seen 
respondent consume alcohol since before the DUI. Respondent has taught two of 
Ms. Floyd’s children. As a parent, she described respondent as a “fantastic” teacher. As 
a friend and colleague, she considers him “good-hearted.” 
31. Ms. Putnam is a counselor at Argonaut. Along with respondent, she has 
been co-coaching Argonaut’s cross country team for 13 years. Since respondent 
became sober, Ms. Putnam has noticed he appears happier and more relaxed. She 
considers respondent “good with students” and “good with classroom management.” 
As a counselor, students have shared with Ms. Putnam how respondent’s classes 
helped them in college. 
32. Respondent provided a support letter and an affidavit by Clarissa Bellotti, 
a counselor at Argonaut since 2015. Ms. Bellotti knows about the DUI and the 
underlying circumstances. She stated, “I have been very impressed that he has not let 
his misconduct take away from his teaching performance.” Over the years, graduates 
have shared with Ms. Bellotti how respondent’s classes helped them succeed in 
college. Ms. Bellotti considers respondent an asset to the school and one of the best 
teachers in the community and region. 
33. Respondent also provided a performance evaluation in 2023. He was 
evaluated by Jazmin Haedrich, Argonaut’s Assistant Principal. She observed 
respondent “valu[e] students’ backgrounds, interests, and developmental learning 
needs” and “instilled confidence.” Assistant Principal Haedrich concluded respondent 
“has created a safe environment for students to succeed and fail forward.” 12 TESTIMONY OF FAMILY AND FRIENDS
34. Allison Rivas, respondent’s current partner, testified. She and respondent 
have been in a relationship for almost four years and have lived together for two years. 
Her daughter lives with them. Ms. Rivas knows about respondent’s DUI conviction and 
the underlying circumstances. She has never seen respondent consume alcohol, as he 
was already sober when they met. Ms. Rivas considers respondent “one of the best 
fathers [she has] ever seen.” He is “absolutely involved” in the activities and interests of 
his three children as well as her daughter. In addition to supporting his children’s 
extracurricular activities, respondent is also supportive of Ms. Rivas’s daughter’s 
passion for soccer, and he helps train her. 
35. Nicholas Duggan (Nick), respondent’s older brother, testified. Nick lives 
in Santa Barbara, California, and sees respondent and their family approximately once 
every other month and on holidays. Nick and respondent are close and talk regularly. 
Nick's perspective is especially helpful to respondent because Nick has also struggled 
with alcohol in the past. Since the DUI, Nick has observed respondent "make amends" 
both by satisfying the terms of his criminal sentence and by cultivating a better 
relationship with his children. In Nick's opinion, respondent's relationship with his 
children is exemplary. Respondent spends time with them, is involved in their lives, and 
treats them with respect. Nick believes respondent understands the gravity of his 
addiction and DUI, and he has been doing, and continues to do, the "deep work" 
required to live a sober, healthy life. 
36. Tim Duggan (Tim) and Janice Duggan (Jan), respondent’s parents, 
testified. Respondent told them about his DUI conviction and the underlying 
circumstances. Respondent’s parents have not seen him consume alcohol since before 
the DUI. Tim believes respondent has “dedicated his life” to his children and one of his 13 passions, running. According to Tim and Jan, respondent is a “great father.” While 
neither of respondent’s parents has seen him in the classroom, they have observed 
him coach athletes and consider him a good coach. 
37. Jess Williams, respondent’s friend of over 20 years, testified. He knows 
about the DUI and the underlying circumstances. He also knows about respondent’s 
sobriety and has not seen respondent consume alcohol since before the DUI. 
Mr. Williams has observed respondent coach the running club and described him as 
encouraging and helpful. 
Analysis 
38. In (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, the California 
Supreme Court concluded that a teaching credential cannot be disciplined for 
unprofessional conduct, immoral conduct, or conduct involving moral turpitude 
“unless that conduct indicates that the [teacher] is unfit to teach.” (  at p. 229.) The 
Court outlined factors to consider when determining whether a teacher’s conduct 
demonstrates unfitness to teach, which have been codified in California Code of 
Regulations, title 5, section 80302, subdivision (a). The factors are:
(1) the likelihood that the conduct may have adversely 
affected students or fellow teachers, and the degree of such 
adversity anticipated;
(2) the proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct;
(3) the types of credentials held or sought by the person 
involved;14 (4) any extenuating or aggravating circumstances 
surrounding the conduct;
(5) the praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives 
resulting in the conduct; 
(6) the likelihood of recurrence of the questioned conduct; 
(7) the extent to which disciplinary action may have an 
adverse impact or chilling effect upon the constitutional 
rights of the person involved, or other teachers; and 
(8) the publicity or notoriety given to the conduct. 
LIKELIHOOD OF ADVERSE EFFECTS ON STUDENTS OR FELLOW TEACHERS
39. Beyond providing substantive instruction, a teacher also serves as a role 
model, whose words and actions are likely to be followed by students who are still 
learning their roles in the community and how to conduct themselves appropriately. 
As a result, respondent's conduct or reputation should not interfere with his ability, or 
the community’s confidence in his ability, to serve as a role model or earn his students’ 
respect. ( (2011) 
194 Cal.App.4th 1454, 1463-1464;  (2010) 
184 Cal.App.4th 462, 477.) Here, there is no evidence any students knew about 
respondent's DUI or the underlying circumstances. Although respondent took two 
weeks off from teaching to complete his jail term, his students did not know the 
reason for his leave of absence. Consequently, there is no evidence respondent's 
reputation suffered among students or his misconduct interfered with his ability, or 15 the community’s confidence in his ability, to be a role model or earn his students' 
respect. Thus, adverse effects on students are unlikely. 
40. Adverse impacts on fellow teachers are also unlikely. Although several 
fellow teachers knew about respondent's DUI and the underlying circumstances, his 
colleagues seemed to view his misconduct as an aberration in his otherwise positive 
performance and character. His fellow educators did not consider respondent's 
misconduct a reflection of him, them, or the teaching profession, to such extent as to 
negatively impact their ability to teach or earn the respect of students. On the whole, 
respondent's fellow teachers did not appear to experience any adverse effects based 
on his conviction and conduct. Thus, the likelihood they will experience adverse effects 
in the future, based on respondent's misconduct, is low. 
PROXIMITY OR REMOTENESS IN TIME
41. Respondent’s conduct occurred in 2020. It is relatively remote in time, in 
light of respondent’s overall character, remorseful attitude, and otherwise exemplary 
conduct. (See (1979) 90 Cal.App.3d 737, 747.) 
TYPES OF CREDENTIALS HELD AND SOUGHT
42. Respondent holds a Clear Single Subject Teaching Credential. The 
teaching credential requires teaching competence. Furthermore, respondent’s 
particular credential allows him to teach English language development in grades 
twelve and below, including preschool and in classes organized primarily for adults. 
With his credential, respondent may interact with students of all ages, for whom he 
has to model appropriate behavior and good judgment. Therefore, his ability to 
engage in professional conduct and model appropriate behavior to students of 
varying ages, experiences, and learning abilities is important in light of his credential. 16 EXTENUATING OR AGGRAVATING CIRCUMSTANCES
43. Neither the Education Code nor the applicable regulations specify what 
constitutes “extenuating circumstances.” However, California Code of Regulations, 
title 5, section 80300, subdivision (m), defines “mitigating factor” as “an event or 
circumstance which demonstrates that the public, school children and the profession 
would be adequately protected by a more lenient degree of adverse action or no 
adverse action whatsoever.”
44. Respondent’s insight and efforts at rehabilitation are mitigating. 
Although respondent's informal probation ended only six months ago, he has 
demonstrated consistent, voluntary efforts beyond the court's orders. He pursued 
additional resources to help him recover his life. He left a troubled relationship, sought 
a new social group that supports his sobriety, attends AA meetings, secured an AA
sponsor, completed AA’s 12 steps, and continues to work on the "maintenance steps" 
in his daily life. He also completed parenting classes and restarted therapy. 
Commendably, he has been sober for almost four years. 
45. Respondent demonstrated he has used the tools he learned to 
rehabilitate himself. By being open and honest with himself and others, he no longer 
isolates himself and is practicing healthful coping skills through therapy and exercise. 
He has good relationships with his children, family, colleagues, and the community. He 
serves others by teaching, coaching, and mentoring students, athletes, local runners, 
and new teachers. Specifically, the achievements and improvements of his 12th grade 
AP English students within the last few years are a testament to respondent's teaching 
skill. In recognition, a local newspaper named him Amador County’s "best teacher," 
and Argonaut honored him with a "challenge coin" award. 17 46. Further mitigating is the support of other Argonaut educators. As 
respondent's supervisors, Principal Gassaway and Assistant Principal Haedrich's 
observations and opinions on respondent are given great weight. They each praised 
respondent's acumen in teaching substantive materials and connecting with students. 
Collectively, respondent's colleagues regard him highly, as an asset to Argonaut, the 
local community, and the teaching profession. As a whole, respondent's consistent and 
successful efforts at personal growth and his teaching performance are significantly 
mitigating. 
47. California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80300, subdivision (b), lists 
aggravating factors, the presence of which indicate a greater degree of discipline is 
necessary to protect students and the teaching profession. Complainant alleged the 
following aggravating factors: (1) misconduct that evidences multiple acts of 
wrongdoing and demonstrates a pattern of misconduct; (2) misconduct surrounded or 
followed by bad faith, dishonesty, or other violation of the laws governing educators; 
and (3) significant harm to a child entrusted to the care of a credential holder or 
applicant, the public, or the educational system. ( at subds. (b)(2), (3), (4).) 
48. Complainant did not establish how respondent’s DUI conviction, based 
on a single incident, constituted multiple acts of wrongdoing or demonstrated a 
pattern of misconduct. Similarly, complainant also did not show how respondent’s 
conduct was surrounded or followed by bad faith, dishonesty, or other violation of the 
laws governing educators. Further, complainant did not establish whether 
respondent’s misconduct caused any harm to his children, the public, or the 
educational system. While driving with a BAC of 0.25 percent was dangerous, 
fortunately, no one was physically harmed. Complainant did not show whether 18 respondent’s actions showed any type of actual harm or whether any harm he caused 
rose to the level of significant harm. 
PRAISEWORTHINESS OR BLAMEWORTHINESS OF MOTIVES RESULTING IN THE 
MISCONDUCT  
49. Respondent's conduct was blameworthy in several respects. Despite 
knowing he had to drive his children to the dentist’s office, he consumed a 
considerable amount of alcohol prior to driving. After the dentist, he again drove his 
children and consumed two more beers at the restaurant. Respondent’s BAC was 
extremely high. His willingness to endanger himself, his children, and the public is 
irresponsible conduct incompatible with the teaching profession. ( , , 184 
Cal.App.4th at p. 477.)
LIKELIHOOD OF RECURRENCE  
50. The likelihood of recurrence is minimal. Respondent was remorseful and 
admitted his convictions, the underlying circumstances, and his wrongdoing and poor 
judgment. He testified credibly and persuasively about the insight he has gained, the 
tools he has learned, and the changes he has made and sustained. Respondent 
completed his criminal probation and has maintained his sobriety. His teaching 
performance has improved in the last few years, and his students are succeeding 
because of his efforts. Respondent’s colleagues regard him well and support him. In 
addition to them, he has a support system in his family, friends, AA group, therapy, 
and even his running club. Respondent has demonstrated the safeguards he created
to prevent recurrence of his maladaptive and dangerous behavior have been effective.
Respondent’s behavior since his DUI shows a change in attitude from the time of his 
misconduct. This attitude change is “arguably the most important [factor] in predicting 19 future conduct.” ( (2012) 211 Cal.App.4th 141, 149.) In weighing the 
evidence, it is unlikely for respondent’s conduct to recur. 
ADVERSE IMPACT OR CHILLING EFFECT 
51. There is no evidence discipline would adversely impact or chill 
respondent or any other teacher in the free exercise of their constitutional rights.
PUBLICITY OR NOTORIETY OF MISCONDUCT
52. Apart from respondent’s brief leave of absence from teaching to serve 
his jail sentence, there is no evidence respondent’s conduct was publicized or 
notorious. 
CONCLUSION  
53. Respondent’s mitigating evidence is substantial and persuasive. He 
accepted responsibility. He satisfied his criminal sentence, addressed his wrongdoing, 
and created safeguards to prevent recurrence. By all accounts, respondent appears to 
be doing well personally and professionally. He has been sober for nearly four years. 
He continues to make amends to his children and has a good relationship with them. 
He has the support of his family and friends. Respondent receives guidance from AA 
and therapy and copes with stressors by serving others, through teaching, coaching, or 
mentoring.
54. A teacher’s fitness to teach is determined by considering their future 
classroom performance and overall impact on students. ( , , 1 Cal.3d at 
p. 229.) Here, there is no evidence respondent’s DUI and underlying conduct 
negatively impacted his teaching. The opposite appears to be the case: his classroom 
performance and impact on students, since the DUI, have been positive. To 20 respondent’s credit, his students have been performing increasingly well on the AP 
English exam. Within the last few years, respondent’s performance has been 
recognized by Argonaut, including his supervisors Principal Gassaway and Assistant 
Principal Haedrich, and by the community. 
55. However, although respondent has demonstrated insight, established 
positive, sustained changes, and appears to be performing well as a teacher, the clear 
and convincing evidence shows his DUI conviction and underlying conduct were 
unprofessional and unbecoming of a teacher. Nevertheless, complainant did not 
establish respondent’s conduct rose to the level of immorality or moral turpitude. His 
actions were not motivated by a desire to harm his children, students or teachers, or 
the educational system. Respondent has been consistently honest and forthcoming 
about his wrongdoing. 
56. When all the evidence is considered in light of the factors, 
respondent has demonstrated he can perform his duties as a teacher in a manner 
consistent with the protection of the public, students, and the profession. In light of 
his unprofessional conduct, the Commission may privately admonish, publicly reprove, 
revoke, or suspend his teaching credential. Here, in weighing the evidence, a more 
lenient degree of discipline would adequately protect the public, and a public reproval 
is appropriate. A public reproval would serve the interests of public protection by
constituting prior discipline that can be considered in the event respondent engages 
in future misconduct. Furthermore, a public reproval balances the Commission’s 
interest in regulating its licensees in consideration of the mitigation evidence and 
respondent’s significant rehabilitation. Thus, respondent should be publicly reproved.21 LEGAL CONCLUSIONS
Burden and Standard of Proof 
1. Complainant has the burden of proving the allegations in the Accusation 
by clear and convincing evidence to a reasonable certainty. (
 (1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035.) Clear and convincing evidence 
requires proof that is so clear as to leave no substantial doubt and that is sufficiently 
strong to command the unhesitating assent of every reasonable mind. (
(2008) 169 Cal.App.4th 176, 190.) 
Applicable Law 
2. Pursuant to the Education Code, commencing with section 44000, and 
California Code of Regulations, title 5, commencing with section 80000, the 
Commission is responsible for credentialing teachers in public schools in California, 
including taking adverse action against applicants and credential holders. 
3. The Commission may privately admonish, publicly reprove, revoke, or 
suspend a credential for immoral or unprofessional conduct, evident unfitness of 
service, or any cause that would warrant denial of an application, such as an act 
involving moral turpitude. (Ed. Code, §§ 44345, subd. (e), 44421.)
4. An aggravating factor is an event or circumstance that demonstrates a 
greater degree of discipline is necessary to adequately protect the public, 
schoolchildren, or the profession. Aggravating factors include multiple acts of 
wrongdoing or a pattern of misconduct; misconduct surrounded or followed by bad 
faith, dishonesty, or other violation of laws governing educators; and misconduct 22 significantly harming a child, the public, or educational system. (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, 
§ 80300, subd. (b).) 
5. California Code of Regulations, title 5, 80302, subdivision (a), provides 
the factors to consider to ”determine the relationship between the alleged misconduct 
and the applicant’s or holder’s fitness, competence, or ability to effectively perform the 
duties authorized by the credential.” 
6. The California Supreme Court has recognized that the terms ”immoral 
conduct” and ”unprofessional conduct” substantially overlap one another and conduct 
that constitutes one often includes the other. ( , , 1 Cal.3d 214, 221, 
fn. 9.) ”Unprofessional conduct” includes “that which violates the rules of ethical code 
of a profession or such conduct which is unbecoming a member of a profession in 
good standing.” (  (1953) 41 Cal.2d 
546, 553, internal quotations omitted.) Additionally, in 
, , 194 Cal.App.4th at page 
1466, the court explained: 
[T]he definition of immoral or unprofessional conduct must 
be considered in conjunction with the unique position of 
public school teachers, upon whom are imposed 
”responsibilities and limitations on freedom of action which 
do not exist in regard to other callings.” [Citation.] 
7. Immoral conduct is sometimes considered as synonymous with 
“dishonesty” or a high degree of unfairness. (
 (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811.) The court explained in 
 (1970) 9 Cal.App.3d 967, 972: 23 The term “immoral” has been defined as that which is 
hostile to the welfare of the general public and contrary to 
good morals. Immorality includes conduct inconsistent with 
rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, 
dissoluteness; or as willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct 
showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable 
members of the community, and as an inconsiderate 
attitude toward good order and the public welfare. 
8. Moral turpitude has been defined as ”everything done contrary to justice, 
honesty, modesty or good morals.” (  (1979) 89 
Cal.App.3d 30, 36.) It includes any crime or misconduct committed without excuse, or 
any dishonest act not necessarily a crime. (See  (1979) 98 Cal.App.3d 167, 
181.)
Causes for Discipline 
9. Complainant established, by clear and convincing evidence, respondent 
committed acts of unprofessional conduct by consuming alcohol excessively, driving 
with his minor children in the vehicle, and consequently suffering a conviction for 
violating Vehicle Code section 23152, subdivision (b), driving with a BAC of 0.08 
percent or more. Thus, cause exists to discipline respondent’s credentials, certificates, 
and authorizations for unprofessional conduct, pursuant to Education Code section 
44421.
10. Complainant failed to establish, by clear and convincing evidence, 
respondent committed acts of immoral conduct. Thus, cause does not exist to 24discipline respondent’s credentials, certificates, and authorizations for immoral 
conduct, pursuant to Education Code section 44421.
11. Complainant failed to establish, by clear and convincing evidence, 
respondent committed acts of moral turpitude. Thus, cause does not exist to discipline 
respondent’s credentials, certificates, and authorizations pursuant for acts of moral 
turpitude, pursuant to Education Code sections 44345, subdivision (e), and 44421.
Appropriate Discipline
12. Discipline for unprofessional conduct can consist of private 
admonishment, public reproval, suspension of the credential, or revocation of the 
credential. (Ed. Code, § 44421.) As discussed above, when all the evidence is 
considered, a public reproval of respondent would adequately protect the public, 
students, and the profession.
ORDER
Respondent Cameron Joseph Duggan is PUBLICLY REPROVED. 
DATE: June 17, 2024
PATRICE DE GUZMAN HUBER
Administrative Law Judge
Office of Administrative Hearings
