BEFORE THE  
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING  
STATE OF CALIFORNIA  
In the Matter of  the Accusation  Against : 
DAWN M. IBBS , Respondent  
Agency Case No. 2 -476303123  
OAH No. 2024 100679  
PROPOSED DECISION  
Matthew S. Block , Administrative Law Judge  (ALJ), Office of Administrative 
Hearings (OAH), State of California, heard this matter on May 27, 202 5, by 
videoconference from Sacramento, California . 
Patricia Webber Heim , Deputy Attorney General, represented Mary Vixie  Sandy , 
Ed.D. (complainant), Executive Director of the California Commission on Teacher 
Credentialing (Commission).  
Dawn M. Ibbs (respondent) was present  and represented herself.  
Evidence was received , the record closed , and the matter submitted for decision 
on May 27, 2025.  2 FACTUAL FINDINGS  
Jurisdiction al Matters  
1. On April 3, 2013, the Commission issued respondent a One -Year 
Nonrenewable Speech Language Pathology Services Credential and a Clear Speech 
Language Pathology Services Credential (SLP Credential). The SLP Credential will expire 
on May 1, 2028, unless renewed . 
2. On August 20, 2024, in her official capacity, complainant’s representative 
signed and thereafter filed the Accusation against respondent . The  Accusation allege d 
cause to discipline respondent’s c redential s for: (1) immoral conduct ; (2) 
unprofessional conduct; (3) evident unfitness for service; and ( 4) moral turpitude . More 
specifically, the Accusation alleged that on December 19, 2022, respondent was 
convicted of driving while intoxicated (DWI) and third -degree assault in the State of 
New York.  
3. As factors in aggravation, complainant allege d respondent ’s misconduct 
was followed by bad faith, dishonesty, or other violation of the law governing 
educators. Additionally, complainant alleged respondent’s misconduct significantly 
harmed a child entrusted to her care, the public, or the educational system.  
4. Respondent timely filed a Notice of Defense to the Accusation. The 
matter was set for evidentiary hearing before an ALJ of the OAH, an independent adjudicative agency of the State of California, pursuant to Government Code section 
11500 et seq.  3 Complainant’s Evidence  
5. On December 19, 2022, in Local Criminal Court, Village of Weedsport, 
State of New York, County of Cayuga, Case No. 21120066, respondent was convicted 
by guilty plea of violating New York Vehicle and Traffic Law Section 1192.3 ( DWI), a 
misdemeanor. On the same date, i n Case No. 21120069, respondent was convicted by 
guilty plea of violating the Penal Law of New York, subdivision 1, section 120.03 (third-degree assault), a misdemeanor.  In both cases, imposition of sentence  was suspended, 
and respondent was placed on probation for one year subject to terms and conditions, including that she pay court fees and restitution and install an ignition interlock device on her vehicle.  
6. The conduct underlying both convictions was the same. On December 
25, 2021, respondent drove a motor vehicle while intoxicated . She ran a red light and 
collided with another vehicle in the middle o f an intersection. One of the people in the 
other vehicle was 35 weeks pregnant. The expectant mother  suffered internal bleeding 
and damage to the placenta and was forced to undergo an emergency c esarian 
section operation as a result.  
Respondent’s Evidence  
RESPONDENT ’S TESTIMONY  
7. Respondent testified at hearing. She was born and raised in upstate New 
York. She received a Bachelor of Science degree in communication disorders from 
State University of New York at Cortland in 2007, and a Master of Science degree in 
speech -language pathology from Ithaca College in 2009.  Respondent moved to 
California in 2012. She is 47 years old and presently resides in Modesto. She has 4 worked as a speech -language pathologist for Modesto City Schools for the last eight 
years.  
8. After moving to California, r espondent typically returned to New York to 
visit her mother during the summer and  around Christmas . Her ability to do so was 
limited  by the COVID -19 pandemic, and it had been some time since she had seen her 
mother when she last visited her in December 2021 . At the time, respondent’s  mother 
was bedridden, and her health was rapidly declining due to heart problems. It was 
difficult for respondent to see her mother in such a condition, and she became 
emotional while testifying at hearing about  that visit and the events surrounding  it. 
9. After spending Christmas Day with her mother, respondent went to her 
grandmother’s house for dinner, where she consumed two glasses of wine.  
Respondent left her grandmother’s house and began driving to her father’s house  
after dinner . It was snowing. She thinks she was travelling approximately 30 miles per 
hour when she ran the red light and collided with the other vehicle.  
10. On January 5, 2022, respondent entered a year -long substance abuse 
treatment program through Kaiser Permanente. She attended group and individual 
counseling sessions and submitted to biological fluid testing. Although she was not 
required to do so, respond ent also began attending Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) 
meetings to reevaluate her relationship with alcohol.  
11. Respondent successfully completed the substance abuse treatment 
program. She does not drink alcohol. However, she does not consider herself an 
alcoholic and she no longer attends AA. Respondent acknowledges she made a very 
poor decision to drive after consuming alcohol, but feels it was an aberrant event in an 5 otherwise law- abiding life, caused in part by the emotional hardship of seeing how 
much her mother’s health had deteriorated since the last time she saw her.  
12. Respondent ’s driver’s license was suspended for six months  following her 
conviction. She paid approximately $20,000 on fines, legal fees, and travel to New York 
to appear in court. Her DWI conviction will remain on her criminal record  for the 
remainder of her life because the State of New York does not allow expungement of 
DWI convictions.  
13. Respondent is deeply remorseful for driving under the influence and 
harming another person. At their request, respondent wrote a letter to the victims in 
her criminal case  which was received in evidence at hearing . That letter , dated April 4, 
2023,  provides, in pertinent part:  
I am also a mother and because of this I understand the 
gravity of what I have done. You were not afforded the 
natural, peaceful, and joyful experience of childbirth. Instead, it was traumatic and stressful due to my actions. 
For that reason, I will be for ever remorseful.  
I promise that this will never happen again. I now fully 
understand the danger of my actions. I am horrified by the 
fact that I could have taken my own life, or even worse 
another person’s life. I had no right to do what I did. I have 
worked to ensure this will not happen again by 
participating in counseling, a Victim Impact Panel, and 
attending Al coholics Anonymous. This is my first DWI 
offense and it will be my last.  6 14. Respondent loves working as a speech pathologist with children. She is 
embarrassed by her arrest and convictions, and very few of her colleagues know about 
them. She has never been arrested or convicted of any other offenses. She is hopeful 
that she will b e able to continue working for Modesto City Schools, and she has made 
them aware of the possibility her credentials will be disciplined.  
LETTERS OF SUPPORT  
15. Respondent submitted letters of support from two individuals, both of 
whom are aware of respondent’s convictions in New York. The first was written by Shayna Clark, who works as a Special Education Program Manager for Modesto City Schools. Ms. Clark wrote, in pertinent part:  
[Respondent] is effective in working with students who are receiving Speech services on campus. She works hard to create a safe learning environment and builds rapport with students and parents. She seeks professional development 
opportunities to further her knowledge and dedication to 
education and Special Education services for students. [Respondent] brings a plethora of knowledge and expertise 
to each meeting we hold and works with colleagues to 
improve our student outcomes. She shares strategies with parents and helps promote Speech and Education in the 
home environment. [Respondent] is a great asset to our school site and provides excellent education and services to our community.  7 16. The second letter  was written by Education Specialist Kari L. Bettencourt, 
who has worked with respondent at Roosevelt Junior High School for the past four 
years. Ms. Bettencourt wrote, in pertinent part:  
[Respondent] has consistently demonstrated a strong 
command of content knowledge, in the area of Speech 
related disabilities as well as an ability to make material 
accessible and engaging for all learners. She is especially skilled at differentiating instr uction, integrating technology 
and creating a positive experience for her students.  
Perhaps most importantly, [respondent] approaches the profession with genuine care and integrity. She has great rapport with students and is exemplary, and she 
consistently fosters a safe, inclusive, and respectful 
environment where learners can thrive.  
EMPLOYEE EVALUATION  
17. Respondent’s employee evaluation for the 2024- 2025 school year was 
received in evidence. Evaluator Emily Poisson observed respondent engaging with 
students during the evaluation, and noted, in part:  
[Respondent] demonstrates a strong capacity to engage 
and support all students in their learning by connecting 
content to students’ lives and needs. She thoughtfully 
integrates real -world applications into her speech -language 
sessions, using tools such as emotion charts, sentence 
frames, and interactive games like Connect 4 and dice 8 racing. These activities provide students with the 
opportunity to develop social communication, emotional 
intelligence, and academic skills in a low -stress, supportive 
environment. Her use of personal greetings and rapport -
building techniques enhance stude nt comfort and readiness 
to learn.  
18. Of respondent’s understanding and organization of subject matter to 
support student learning, Ms. Poisson wrote:  
[Respondent] demonstrates deep content knowledge in 
speech -language development and organizes her 
instruction to be developmentally appropriate and 
accessible for diverse learners. She presents content in 
manageable steps, revisiting key concepts and using visuals, 
modeling, and sentence frames to scaffold learning. 
Instruction is thematically aligned to IEP goals, ensuring 
that all materials and activities support specific student 
objectives. Through thoughtful planning and consistent 
formative checks, [respondent] helps students build 
understanding and confidence in applying concepts such as 
emotional expression, grammatical accuracy, and social 
communication.  
CONTINUING EDUCATION  
19. Respondent is required to complete 30 hours of continuing education 
every three years. She testified she has completed 22 hours of continuing education 9 within the past year alone. She also submitted numerous certificates demonstrating 
completion of continuing education classes on topics such as  apraxia of speech and 
language development.  
Analysis  
20. The facts in this case are undisputed. In December 2022, r espondent was 
convicted of DWI  and third -degree assault in the State of New York . She  drove a 
vehicle while under the influence of alcohol  and ran a red light, colliding with another 
vehicle in the intersection . One of the occupants of that vehicle was 35 weeks 
pregnant and was required  to undergo an emergency cesarian section operation due 
to internal bleeding and damage to the placenta.  At issue  here is whether 
respondent’s convictions and the circumstances underlying them constitute immoral 
conduct, unprofessional conduct , and moral turpitude, and whether they are 
attributable to a temperamental defect which demonstrates she is unsuitable for the teaching profession.  
21. There is broad discretion in determining what constitutes immoral 
conduct in the context of teacher disciplinary matters. (
California Teachers Assn. v. 
State of California  (1999) 20 Cal.4th 327. ) Immoral conduct has been defined by the 
courts as follows:  
[T]hat which is hostile to the welfare of the general public 
and contrary to good morals. Immorality has not been 
confined to sexual matters, but includes conduct 
inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; o r as willful, flagrant, or 
shameless conduct showing moral indifference to the 10 opinions of respectable members of the community, and as 
an inconsiderate attitude toward good order and the public 
welfare. ( Palo Verde etc. School Dist. v. Hensey  (1970) 9 
Cal.App.3d 967, 972, citing Bd. of Education of San 
Francisco Unified School Dist. v. Weiland  (1960) 179 
Cal.App.2d 808, 811.)  
22. Unprofessional conduct has been defined as “that conduct which 
breaches the rules or ethical code of a profession or conduct which is unbecoming a member in good standing of a profession.” (
Shea v. Bd. of Medical  Examiners  (1978) 81 
Cal.App.3d 564, 575; Bd. of Education v. Swan  (1953) 41 Cal.2d 546, 553.)  “Evident 
unfitness for service” means a teacher is clearly not fit, not adapted to or unsuitable 
for teaching, ordinarily by reason of temperamental defects or inadequacies. 
(Woodland v. Joint Unified School District v. Commission on Professional Competence  
(1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444.) “Unlike ‘unprofessional conduct,’ ‘evident unfitness 
for service’ connotes a fixed character trait, presumably not remediable merely on 
receipt of notice that one’s conduct fails to meet the expectations of the employing 
school district.” ( Ibid.) 
23. A criminal act constitutes moral turpitude if it involves a serious breach 
of a duty owed to another individual or society. ( In re Lesansky  (2001) 25 Cal.4th 11, 
16.) Acts of moral turpitude involve “bad character” and “readiness to do evil.” ( People 
v. Zataray  (1985) 173 CalApp.3d 390, 400.) Moral turpitude has also been described as 
“any crime or misconduct committed without excuse, or any ‘dishonest or immoral’ act 
not necessarily a crime.” ( Clerici v. Dept. of Motor Vehicles  (1990) 224 Cal.App.3d 1016, 
1027.) A crime of moral turpitude is “an act of baseness, vileness or depravity in the 
private and social duties which a man owes to his fellowmen, or to society in general, 11 contrary to the accepted and customary rule of right and duty between man and man.” 
(In re Craig  (1938) 12 Cal.2d 93, 97.)  
24. Respondent’s decision to drive a vehicle after drinking was irresponsible  
and dangerous . Her conduct forced an expectant mother to undergo emergency 
surgery and was very unbecoming of an educator  in good standing. It also 
demonstrated that on the evening in question, respondent had an inconsiderate 
attitude toward the public welfare. Consequently, complainant proved by clear and convincing evidence that respondent engaged in immoral and unprofessional conduct.  
25. However, making a poor decision, even one which results in injury to 
another, does not necessarily establish that an individual has a non -remediable 
temperamental defect . Nor does it establish that an individual is of bad character or 
ready to do evil. In this case, respondent has taken full responsibility for the 
consequences of her actions. In her letter to the victims and in her testimony at 
hearing, it was clear that respondent fully appreciates the gravity of what occurred . 
26. Immediately following her arrest, respondent voluntarily began 
participating in substance abuse treatment and AA. Although she no longer attends AA, she continues to abstain from drinking. Accepting responsibility and taking 
affirmative measures to prevent future harm are indicative of good character, 
notwithstanding a lapse in good judgment. When all the evidence is considered, 
complainant did not establish by clear and convincing evidence that respondent’s conduct is indicative of moral turpitude, or indi cative of a fixed character trait 
rendering respondent unsuitable for the teaching profession.  
27. In 
Morrison v. State Board of Education  (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, the California 
Supreme Court concluded that a teaching credential cannot be disciplined for immoral 12 or unprofessional conduct  “unless that conduct indicates that the [educator] is unfit to 
teach.” ( Id. at p. 229.) The Court outlined factors to consider when determining 
whether an educator’s conduct demonstrates unfitness to teach, which have been 
codified in California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80302, subdivision (a). The factors are:  
(1) the likelihood that the conduct may have adversely 
affected students or fellow teachers, and the degree of such adversity anticipated;  
(2) the proximity or remoteness in time of the conduct;  
(3) the types of credentials held or sought by the person 
involved;  
(4) any extenuating or aggravating circumstances 
surrounding the conduct;  
(5) the praiseworthiness or blameworthiness of the motives 
resulting in the conduct;  
(6) the likelihood of recurrence of the question conduct;  
(7) the extent to which disciplinary action may have an 
adverse impact or chilling effect on the constitutional rights 
of the person involved, or other teachers ; and 
(8) the publicity or notoriety given to the conduct.  13 LIKELIHOOD OF ADVERSE EFFECTS ON STUDENTS OR OTHER TEACHERS  
28. Although respondent’s conduct harmed another person and posed a risk 
of harm to society in general, no students or other teachers were adversely affected.  
PROXIMITY OR REMOTENESS IN TIME 
29. Respondent was arrested for the underlying offenses over  three  and a 
half years ago . They are  more remote than proximate in time.  
TYPES OF CREDENTIALS HELD OR SOUGHT  
30. Respondent presently holds a Clear SLP Credential. She previously held a 
One-Year Nonrenewable Speech Language Pathology Services Credential, over which 
the Commission retains jurisdiction. (Ed. Code, § 44440, subd. (b).)  
EXTENUATING OR AGGRAVATING CIRCUMSTANCES  
31. Neither the Education Code nor the applicable regulations specify what 
constitutes “extenuating circumstances.” However, California Code of Regulations, title 
5, section 80300, subdivision (m), defines “mitigating factor” as “an event or 
circumstance which  demonstrates that the public, school children and the profession 
would be adequately protected by a more lenient degree of adverse action or no 
adverse action whatsoever.”  California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80300, 
subdivision (b), lists aggr avating factors, the presence of which indicate a greater 
degree of discipline is necessary to protect students and the teaching profession. These factors include, in pertinent part: (1) a prior record of adverse action; (2) that the 
misconduct significant ly harmed a child, the public, or the educational system; and (3) 
the credential holder demonstrated indifference toward the consequence of the 
misconduct.  14 32. Respondent has no prior disciplinary record with the Commission. At the 
time of her arrest, respondent was struggling to emotionally cope with her mother’s 
deteriorating health. Weather conditions were poor. Still, respondent  significantly 
harmed an expectant mother, who was required to undergo emergency surgery for her 
own safety and the safety of her child.  In her testimony, and in the evidence she 
submitted, respondent did not demonstrate indifference toward the consequence of 
her misconduct. On the cont rary, respondent demonstrated significant remorse for her 
misconduct, and an appreciation of the seriousness of drinking and driving.  
PRAISEWORTHINESS OR BLAMEWORTHINESS OF MOTIVES  
33. There was nothing praiseworthy about respondent’s decision to drive a 
vehicle while under the influence of alcohol.  
LIKELIHOOD OF RECURRENCE  
34. The incident at issue here occurred over three and a half years ago. 
Respondent has had no additional arrests or convictions. She successfully completed a 
year-long substance abuse treatment program, and she no longer consumes alcohol. 
When all the evidence is considered, respondent’s behavior  appears to have been an 
aberrant act that is  unlikely to recur.  
CHILLING EFFECT  
35. There is no evidence that disciplin ing respondent’s credentials would 
adversely impact or chill respondent or any other teacher in the free exercise of their constitutional rights.  15 PUBLICITY OR NOTORIETY GIVEN TO CONDUCT  
36. No evidence was presented that the conduct at issue was either 
publicized or notorious.  
Conclusion  
37. Complainant proved respondent engaged in unprofessional conduct by 
driving a vehicle while intoxicated. Her decision to place the public at risk was very 
unbecoming of an educator and established that she engaged in immoral and 
unprofessional conduct . However, in light of the mitigating evidence addressed in 
Factual Findings 2 5 and 2 6, outright revocation of her credentials is not warranted. 
Suspending her credentials for 30  days is sufficient  to protect children, the public, and 
the teaching profession.  
LEGAL CONCLUSIONS  
Burden and Standard of Proof  
1. Complainant bears the burden of proving the allegations in the  
Accusation by clear and convincing evidence to a reasonable certainty. ( Gardner v. 
Commission on Professional Competence  (1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035.)  Clear and 
convincing evidence requires proof that is so clear as to leave no substantial doubt 
and that is sufficiently strong to command the unhesitating assent of every reasonable 
mind. ( In re Marriage of Brook s & Robinson  (2008) 169 Cal.App.4th 176, 190.)  16 Applicable Law  
2. Pursuant to the Education Code, commencing with section 44000, and 
California Code of Regulations, title 5, commencing with section 80000, the 
Commission is responsible for credentialing teachers in public schools in California, 
including issuing credentia ls and taking adverse action against applicants and 
credential holders.  
3. Education Code section 44345 provides in part:  
The Commission may deny any application for the issuance 
of a credential or for the re newal  of a credential made by an 
applicant who falls under any of the following categories:  
[¶] . . . [¶]  
(e) Has committed any act involving moral turpitude.  
Any denial pursuant to subdivisions (a) to (e), inclusive, shall 
be based upon reasons related to the applicant’s fitness to 
teach or fitness to perform other duties which the 
credential would authorize the applicant to perform.  
4. Education Code section 44421 provides, in part:  
The Commission on Teacher Credentialing shall privately admonish, publicly reprove, revoke, or suspend for immoral or unprofessional conduct, or for persistent defiance of, and 
refusal to obey, the laws regulating the duties of persons 
serving in the publi c school system, or for any cause that 17 would have warranted the denial of an application for a 
credential or the renewal thereof, or for evident unfitness 
for service.  
5. Education Code section 44440, subdivision (b), provides:  
The suspension or expiration of any credential, its surrender 
without the written consent of the commission, or a 
revocation pursuant to Section 44423 does not deprive the commission of its authority to do the following:  
(1) Institute or continue a disciplinary proceeding against 
the credential holder upon any ground provided by law.  
(2) Enter an order suspending or revoking the credential.  
(3) Issue a public reproval or private admonition to the 
credential holder.  
6. California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80300, states in part:  
[¶] . . . [¶] 
(b) “Aggravating factor” is an event or circumstance which 
demonstrates that a greater degree of adverse action for an 
act of professional misconduct is needed to adequately 
protect the public, schoolchildren or the profession. 
Aggravating factors may include,  but are not limited to, the 
following:  
[¶] . . . [¶]  18 (2) that the misconduct was surrounded by or followed by 
bad faith, dishonesty or other violation of the laws 
governing educators;  
[¶] . . . [¶]  
(4) that the misconduct significantly harmed a child 
entrusted to the care of a credential holder or applicant, 
significantly harmed the public or the educational system ; 
7. As set forth in Factual Finding 27 , California Code of Regulations, title 5, 
section 80302, subdivision (a), sets forth the factors to consider “to determine the relationship between the alleged misconduct and the applicant’s or holder’s fitness, competence, or ability to effectively perfo rm the duties authorized by the credential.”  
Cause s for Discipline  
8. Based on the Factual Findings and Legal Conclusions as a whole, 
complainant establish ed by clear and convincing evidence that respondent committed 
acts constituting immoral conduct when she drove a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcohol. Consequently, cause exist s to discipline her credentials for 
immoral conduct pursuant to Education Code section 44421.  
9. Based on the Factual Findings and Legal Conclusions as a whole, 
complainant  established by clear and convincing evidence that respondent committed 
acts constituting unprofessional conduct when she drove a motor vehicle while under 
the influence of alcohol. Consequently, cause exists to discipline her credentials for unprofessional conduct pursuant to Educatio n Code section 44421 . 19 10. Based on the Factual Findings and Legal Conclusions as a whole, 
complainant did not establish that respondent is clearly unsuitable for teaching by 
reason of temperamental defects or inadequacies  because she drove a motor vehicle 
while under the influence of alcohol. Consequently, cause does not exist to discipline 
her credentials for evidence unfitness for service pursuant to Education Code section 
44421 . 
11. Based on the Factual Findings and Legal Conclusions as a whole, 
complainant did not establish that respondent committed acts of moral turpitude 
when she drove a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcohol. Consequently, 
cause  does not  exist to discipline respondent’s credentials  pursuant to Education Code 
section 44435, subdivision (e).  
Aggravating Factors  
12. Based on the Factual Findings as a whole, complainant did not establish 
that respondent’s misconduct was surrounded by or followed by bad faith, dishonesty, 
or other violation of the law governing educators. Complainant did establish that respondent’s misconduct harmed a member of the public , which is an aggravating 
factor. (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80300, subd. (b)( 4).) 
Appropriate Discipline  
13. Pursuant to Education Code section 44421, the Commission shall 
privately admonish or publicly reprove a credential holder, or revoke or suspend her  
credential, if the credential holder has engaged in immor al conduct, unprofessional 
conduct, action that warrants denial of an application for a credential or the renewal 
thereof, or is evidently unfit for service.  The purpose of licensing proceedings is not 20 punishment, but to protect the public. ( Fahmy v. Medical Bd . of California  (1995) 38 
Cal.App.4th 810, 817.)  
14. Careful consideration has been given to the available disciplinary options. 
When all  the evidence is considered , outright revocation of respondent’s credentials 
would be unduly punitive. However, discipline is warranted, and suspen ding 
respondent’s credentials  for 30 days is appropriate to protect children, the public, and 
the teaching profession.  
ORDER  
The credentials issued to respondent Dawn M. Ibbs  by the California 
Commission on Teacher Credentialing are hereby SUSPENDED for 30 days.
DATE:  June 13, 2025  
MATTHEW S. BLOCK  
Administrative Law Judge  
Office of Administrative Hearings  
 
