BEFORE THE  
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING  
STATE OF CALIFORNIA  
In the Matter of  the Accusation A gainst : 
ASHLEIGH FUCHS , Respondent  
Agency Case No. 2 -535128066  
OAH No. 2025060388  
PROPOSED DECISION  
Sean Gavin , Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings (OAH), 
State of California, heard this matter by videoconference on August 6, 2025, from 
Sacramento , California . 
Jeff Stone , Deputy Attorney General, represented Mary Vixie Sandy, Ed .D., 
(complainant) Executive Director  of the California Commission on Teacher 
Credentialing (Commission ). 
Respondent Ashleigh Fuchs appeared without an attorney.  
Evidence was received , the record  closed , and the parties submitted the matter 
for decision on August 6, 2025 . 2 FACTUAL FINDINGS  
Jurisdictional Matters  
1. Respondent holds or held the following  credentials and certificates from 
the Commission (collectively, “respondent’s credentials”):  
On September 25, 2014, the Commission issued respondent  a Certificate of 
Clearance, which expired on October 1, 2019, and has not been renewed.  
On September 8, 2017 , the Commission issued respondent a n Emergency 30 -
Day Substitute Teaching Permit, which expired on October 1, 2018, and has not been 
renewed.  
On November 13, 2018, the Commission issued respondent a n Emergency 30 -
Day Substitute Teaching Permit , which expired on October 1, 2019, and has not been  
renewed.  
On November 13, 2018, the Commission issued respondent a  Preliminary Five -
Year Multiple Subject Teaching Credential, which e xpired on December 1, 2023, and 
has not been renewed.  
On June 27, 2024, the Commission issue d respondent a Clear Multiple Subject 
Teaching Credential, which will expire on July 1, 2029, unless renewed . 
2. During its meeting between  August  14 and 16, 202 4, the Commission’s 
Committee of Credentials (Committee) determined probable cause existed to 
recommend that the Commission discipline  respondent’s credentials based on her 
August  2023 conviction for driving with a blood alcohol content (BAC) or 0.08 percent 
or greater (driving under the influence of alcohol, or DUI) and the underlying conduct . 3 Respondent timely requested the Committee  to reconsider its recommendation.  In the 
alternative, she requested an administrative hearing to challenge the Committee’s 
recommendation.  The Committee reconsidered its recommendation  during its meeting 
between October 9 and  11, 2024. Thereafter, the Committee notified respondent it 
would sustai n its previous recommendation  and forward respondent’s request for a 
hearing to the Attorney General’s Office for further action . 
3. On April 8, 2025, complainant, acting  solely in her official capacity, signed 
an Accusation seeking to discipline respondent’s credentials for unprofessional 
conduct, evident unfitness for service, and addiction to the use of intoxicating 
beverages to excess  based on her August  2023 DUI conviction and the underlying 
conduct. The Accusation further alleged, as a matter in aggravation, that the 
Commission suspended respondent’s credentials for 270 days between October 1, 
2023 and June 26, 2024,  based on  her p rior criminal convictions, as detailed in Factual 
Finding s 6 and 7, below. Respondent filed a Notice of Defense to the Accusation.  This 
hearing followed . 
CAUSE FOR DISCIPLINE : AUGUST 2023  DUI  CONVICTION  
4. On August 23 , 202 3, in the Superior Court of California, County of 
Tehama , case number 23CR001692, respondent was convicted, on her guilty plea, of 
violating Vehicle Code section 23152, subdivision (b) (DUI), a misdemeanor. She also admitted a sentencing enhancement under Vehicle Code section 23578 (having a BAC 
exceeding 0.15 percent). The court suspended imposition of sentence  and placed 
respondent on informal probation for three years on conditions that require d her, 
among other things, to serve two days in jail, complete  a three -month DUI program, 
complete 40 hours of Work Program, and pay fines and fees.  4 5. The circumstances underlying the conviction occurred on June 30, 2023. 
Police officers received a report of erratic driving and observed respondent weaving 
while driving . The officers stopped respondent, who smelled of alcohol, slurred her 
speech, and had bloodshot and watery eyes. Respondent performed poorly on field 
sobriety tests.  The officers measured her BAC as 0.21 percent via breath and blood 
sample.  
Matters in Aggravation: 2023- 2024 Suspension for Prior Convictions  
6. In 2022, respondent applied for her Clear Multiple Subject Teaching 
Credential. I n processing the application, the Commission investigated respondent’s 
criminal history . On September 1, 2023, the Commission sent respondent a letter 
notifying her it would suspend her credentials for 270 days . The Commissioner’s letter 
indicated that following the suspension, respondent’s  application for a Clear Multiple 
Subject Teaching Credential  would be granted.  
7. Respondent served the suspension between October 1, 2023 , and June 
26, 2024. The Commission based the suspension on respondent’s : (1) August 2022 
conviction for battery of a  spouse or cohabitant; (2) June 2013 conviction for DUI  
(second offense) in Wisconsin ; (3) her May  2008 conviction for DUI  (first offense)  in 
Wisconsin ; and (4) her January 2007 conviction for obtaining prescription drugs 
through fraud  in Wisconsin . 
Respondent’s Evidence  
8. Respondent testified at hearing about her past alcohol use and 
subsequent rehabilitation and recovery. She also produced documentary evidence to 
show her progress in recovery. She explained she was born and raised in Wisconsin, 5 where it was normal and accepted to  drink alcohol excess ively. She did not learn about 
all the potential risks of alcohol use as a young person.  
9. When respondent  was 17 years old, she got into a n abusive relationship 
and her life changed.  She stayed in that relationship for approximately nine  years, 
during which time she and her partner had two children together.  She us ed alcohol to 
cope with  her stress.  
10. In July 2012, respondent was arrested for DUI . It was her second arrest 
and she felt helpless. Approximately two weeks later, she ended her relationship and 
moved to California with her two children.  She started a small farm and began 
attending classes at California State University, Chico.  Over the next few years , she did 
not completely stop drinking  alcohol, but she did not use it excessively.  
11. In 2016, respondent began a new relationship with a man who had two 
children of his own. They moved in together and lived with their four children as a 
blended family.  Their relationship was healthy for approximately four years, after which 
it worsened.  As her relationship deteriorated, respondent did not have any skills to 
cope with her feelings. The COVID -19 pandemic added even more stress to her life. In 
2020 and 2021, she used alcohol more and more. She developed “a serious alcohol 
problem” by mid -2021.  She did not drink during the week, but on weekends she would 
binge and “didn’t know when to stop.”  
12. In June 2021, respondent was arrested for battering her partner. She had 
been drinking heavily that day . She recognized that her alcohol use had become a 
major problem for her. Shortly thereafter, s he completed  a 10-day in -patient program 
for alcohol abuse and began attending Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) meetings.  Through 
those efforts, she was able to achieve and maintain sobriety.  6 13. In May 2023, respondent received a letter from the Commission 
indicating it intended to suspend her credential s. She thought her “world was over” 
and she relapsed.  Soon after she began drinking alcohol again , on June 30, 2023, she 
was arrested for DUI. The next day , she woke up and “knew [she] couldn’t do thi s 
anymore. ” She resolved to regain and permanently maintain her sobriety.  
14. In addition to completing her court -ordered probation terms, which 
included a three -month DUI program, respondent also sought individual 
psychotherapy. In February 2024, she began treating with Julie Hunter, an Associate 
Marriage and Family Therapist at New Day Family Counseling Center in Red Bluff, 
California. Through cognitive behavioral therapy  (CBT) , Ms. Hunter has helped 
respondent “completely change [her ] life.” She continues to treat with Ms. Hunter 
weekly.  
15. Respondent has used CBT to help her set, track, and achieve personal 
goals. Through that process, she has gained coping skills she did not have before. One  
of the most important skills  that has allowed her to remain sober for more than two 
years is nonjudgmental self -appraisal . For example,  in the past, she was unable to 
differentiate her urge to drink alcohol from her underlying feelings . Now, through self -
reflection  and daily journaling , she can identify and address her feelings before they 
overwhelm her.  
16. Over the past two years, respondent has “ changed [her] entire life to 
basically start over.” She ended her relationship with her partner, in large part because 
she believes he is also an alcoholic but lacks her commitment to sobriety. Additionally, 
she “cut out friends and family who don’t support a sober lifestyle.” Now, she has a 
small group of sober friends who support each other.  She does not attend AA 
meeting s because  she finds it difficult and triggering to spend time around others who 7 are at different points in their own sobriety.  She has not worked AA’s 12- step program, 
but she considers Ms. Hunter to be  like her sponsor.  
17. Despite having her Clear Multiple Subject Teaching Credential  since June  
2024, respondent initially chose not to pursue a permanent teaching position while 
this matter was pending hearing. She teaches elementary school and feared that if she 
began a permanent position but had to leave midway through the school year as a 
result of this matter, her departure would be difficult for the students and for her. 
Instead, she elected to work as a substitute teacher for the past year.  The day before 
this hearing, she  accepted a position to work for the Tehama County Department of 
Education in Red Bluff. The job will focus on the social emotional components of 
education, about which respondent feels especially passionate.  
LETTERS OF SUPPORT  
18. Respondent submitted a letter of support from her eldest daughter, who 
is 19 years old.  Respondent ’s daughter  was present during the events leading to 
respondent’s  battery arrest in June 2021. She noted , “I saw what happened firsthand 
and have also witnessed the growth and improvements since. ” She is also aware of 
respondent’s June 2023 DUI arrest and subsequent conviction . She observed:  
My mom was going through a very difficult time in her life. 
She has come a very long way, and moved my sister and I into a new home with her, and [I] have seen that she has 
stopped drinking, which was a huge factor in what caused her previous actions that led to those charges. She has changed for the better, and even back then, I could never 
believe she was ever a danger to me, the family, and most 8 of all to a child in a school setting. In writing this, I hope to 
help her not lose her teaching credential, because she has 
done the hard work to be better, and I want her to be able 
to continue to support us and herself, most importantly.  
19. Respondent also submitted a letter of support from  Ms. Hunter.  She 
noted one of respondent’s primary goals in therapy has been “to develop a 
sustainable approach to managing her alcohol use. ” In Ms. Hunter’s opinion, 
respondent  “has consistently emphasized the importance of this goal and has taken 
significant steps toward achieving it. ” Together, they analyzed respondent’s prior 
attempts to maintain sobriety and identified alternatives that were more consistent 
with respondent’s needs and values. Specifically, they have focused on improving her 
“lifestyle, living environment, social circle, and personal priorities. ” Ms. Hunter  believes  
respondent is successfully “ applying the strategies and skills that support her 
continued progress. ” 
20. Finally, respondent submitted a letter of support from Christina Agnew, a 
manager at PATH  Plaza  Navigation Center in Red Bluff , where respondent completed 
80 hours of court -ordered community service following her August 2022 battery 
conviction.  Ms. Agne w noted that respondent “ consistently demonstrated 
professionalism, compassion, and a strong work ethic. ” Ms. Agne w praised respondent 
as punctual, dependable, and eager to help. In her opinion,  what stood out most 
about respondent was her “ respectful and empathetic attitude toward our clients and 
[her]  willingness to contribute meaningfully to our mis sion. ” 9 Analysis  
21. It is undisputed respondent was convicted of DUI in August  2023, 
following multiple other convictions since 2008, all of which stemmed from her alcohol 
abuse. The clear and convincing evidence established that respondent engaged in 
unprofessional conduct. The relevant question, then, is what level of discipline is 
necessary and appropriate to protect the public.  
MORRISON  FACTORS  
22. In Morrison v. State Board of Education  (1969) 1 Cal.3d 214, the California 
Supreme Court concluded a teaching credential cannot be disciplined for 
unprofessional conduct  “unless that conduct indicates that the [educator] is unfit to 
teach.” ( Id. at p. 229.) The Court outlined factors to consider when determining 
whether an educator’s conduct demonstrates unfitness to teach ( ibid.), and the 
Commission adopted those factors by enacting California Code of Regulations, title 5, 
section 80302. Those factors are  considered below.  
Likelihood  of Adverse Effect on Students or Fellow 
Teachers  
23. “A teacher [. . .] in the public school system is regarded by the public and 
pupils in the light of an exemplar, whose words and actions are likely to be followed by the children coming under [her]  care and protection .” (
Bd. of Education v. Swan  
(1953) , 41 Cal.2d 546, 552, quoting 66 Corpus Juris, p. 55,  [overruled on other grounds 
by Bekiaris v. Bd. of Ed.  (1972) 6 Cal.3d 575]. ) Respondent’s disregard for the law 
reflects poorly on her individually, and on teachers generally. Moreover, the nature of 
respon dent’s criminal activity demonstrates a severe lack of sound judgment. Because 10 students are impressionable and may try to emulate their teachers, it is essential that 
an educator’s behavior be beyond reproach. Respondent’s August 2023 conviction and 
the underlying conduct demonstrated behavior inimical to the well -being of students, 
and portrayed both her and the teaching profession negatively.  
Proximity of Remoteness in Time  
24. Respondent’s conviction occurred just two years ago, in August 2023. 
That is not remote in time, especially “given  [respondent’s ] record of repeated 
convictions occurring at intervals of ten and five year s.” (Broney v. California Com. o n 
Teacher Credentialing  (2010) 184 Cal.App.4th 462, 477.)  
Type of Credentials Held  
25. Respondent’s Clear Multiple Subject Teaching Credential authorizes her 
to teach students of many ages in a variety of contexts. Therefore, it is even more 
imperative that she exemplify the type of behavior society wants emulated by students 
and possess sou nd judgment. Respondent’s August 2023 DUI conviction and the 
underlying conduct raise concerns over whether she is an appropriate role model for 
her students.  
Extenuating or Aggravating Circumstances  
26. Neither the Education Code nor the regulations adopted by the 
Commission specify what constitutes “extenuating circumstances.” However, the 
California Code of Regulations defines “mitigating factor” as “an event or circumstance which demonstrates that the public, schoolchildren and the profession would be 
adequately protected by a more lenient degree of adverse action or no adverse action 
whatsoever.” (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80300, subd. (m).) The Commission’s regulations 11 also define “aggravating factor” as “an event or circumstance which demonstrates that 
a greater degree of adverse action for an act of professional misconduct is needed to 
adequately protect the public, schoolchildren or the profession.” ( Id. at § 80300, subd. 
(b).) 
27. Respondent’s crimes stem from her past history of alcohol use. To her 
credit, she has ended the relationships in her life with people who did not support her 
goal of sustained sobriety. In aggravation, however, she has a history of criminal conduct attribu table to her alcohol use. Moreover, her August 2023 conviction 
occurred when she relapsed after receiving the news that the Commission intended to discipline her credentials. Faced with a suspension, when respondent had strong reason to be on her best beha vior possible, she committed another crime. This 
suggests the Commission must take additional steps to ensure public protection.  
Praiseworthiness or Blameworthiness of the Motives 
Resulting in the Misconduct  
28. Respondent bears the sole blame for her criminal conduct. Her choices 
led her to drive after using alcohol and the resulting DUI conviction.  
Likelihood of Recurrence  
29. Respondent has already been convicted of DUI multiple times. The 
repeated nature of her criminal conduct demonstrates an ongoing pattern of 
misconduct involving the irresponsible use of alcohol. Furthermore, respondent’s August 2023 conviction occurred when she relapsed following a period of sustained 
sobriety for more than a year. Although she credibly testified that she has now been sober for approximately two years, her recovery is still fairly new and potentially 12 fragile . Moreover, although she treats with Ms. Hunter weekly , she does not attend any 
addiction support groups such as AA.  
Possible Chilling Effect on Constitutional Rights of Others  
30. Neither party presented evidence about the possibility of a chilling effect 
on any person’s constitutional rights. Given the nature of respondent’s criminal 
conduct, such an effect is unlikely.  
Publicity or Notoriety of Misconduct  
31. There was no evidence that respondent’s August 2023 conviction was 
noteworthy or the subject of public interest . 
APPROPRIATE DISCIPLINE BASED ON THE MORRISON  FACTORS  
32. Complainant proved there is cause to discipline respondent’s credentials  
for unprofessional conduct. Based thereon , the Commission “shall privately admonish, 
publicly reprove, revoke or suspend” the credential s in question. (Ed. Code, §  44421.) 
When determining what level of discipline to impose, the Commission should consider 
the aggravating and mitigating factors previously identified. (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, 
§ 80300, subds. (b), (m).)  
33. As discussed above, the aggravating factors here greatly outweigh the 
mitigating factors. Consequently, significant discipline of  respondent’s credentials is 
appropriate. However, the purpose of an administrative disciplinary action is not to punish the licensee for her misconduct, but rather to ensure she does not exercise her license privileges in derogation of the public interest. (
Camacho v. Youde  (1979) 95 
Cal. App. 3d 161, 164.)  Based on respondent’s rehabili tation —inclu ding her  earnest 
acknowledgment of wrongdoing and genuine accountability,  her two years of sobriety, 13 her ongoing work with a therapist, and her new and different social relationships 
designed to support her recove ry—completely revoking her credentials would be 
unduly punitive.  
34. Instead, the appropriate discipline is to suspend  respondent’s credentials  
for one year , but to stay the suspension  and place her credentials on probation,  during 
which time respondent will be subject to  appropriate terms and conditions.  The 
Commission may issue a  stayed suspension “for a specified period of time only if the 
stay and performance of specified rehabilitative or probationary duties by the 
credential holder during the period of the stay is deemed consistent with the purposes 
of professional discipline .” (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80300, subd. (t)(1).)  
35. Here, the probationary terms and conditions  will, among other things, 
forbid respondent from using alcohol or any other unprescribed controlled substances. 
They will also require respondent to submit to biological fluid testing and attend an 
addiction support group  meeting , such as AA, at least twice  per month.  Probation will 
allow the Commission to monitor respondent’s conduct and act quickly to discipline  
her credentials in the event she violates its terms . Given respondent’s relatively recent 
sobriety, c oupled with her past relapses following similar  stretches of sobriety, the 
probationary period should be five years.  
LEGAL CONCLUSIONS  
Burden and Standard of Proof  
1. Complainant bears the burden of proving grounds to discipline  
respondent’s credentials, and must do so by clear and convincing evide nce to a 
reasonable certainty. ( Daniels v. Dept. of Motor Vehicles  (1983) 33 Cal.3d 532, 536 14 [“When an administrative agency initiates an action to suspend or revoke a license, the 
burden of proving the facts necessary to support the action rests with the agency 
making the allegation”]; Gardener v. Com . on Professional Competence  (1985) 164 
Cal.App.3d 1036, 1039 -1040 [recognizing that the clear and convincing evidence 
standard applies to proceedings to discipline a teacher’s credential, whereas the lesser 
preponderance of the evidence standard applies to proceedings to dismiss a teacher  
from partic ular employment].) “The courts have defined clear and convincing evidence 
as evidence which is so clear as to leave no substantial doubt and as sufficiently strong to command the unhesitating as sent of every reasonable mind. [Citations.]  It has been 
said that a preponderance calls for probability, while clear and convincing proof 
demands a 
high probability  [citations].” (In re Terry D.  (1978) 83 Cal.App.3d 890, 899; 
italics original. ) 
Causes for Discipline  
2. The Commission may discipline a credential for unprofessional conduct. 
(Ed. Code, § 44421.) “Unprofessional conduct” includes “‘that which violates the rules of ethical code of a profession or such conduct which is unbecoming a member of a profession in good standing .’” (
Bd. of Education v. Swan , supra , 41 Cal.2d at p. 553.)  
Respondent’s August 2023 DUI conviction, and the conduct underlying it, constitute 
unprofessional conduct. Therefore, complainant established by clear and convincing 
evidence that cause exists to discipline respondent’s  credential s for unprofessional 
conduct pursuant to Education Code section 44421 . 
3. The Commission may discipline a credential for evident unfitness for 
service. (Ed. Code, § 44421.)  “‘Evident unfitness for service ’ means a teacher is clearly 
not fit, not adapted to or unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of 
temperamental defects or inadequacies.” ( Woodland Joint Unified School Dist. v. Com. 15 on Professional Competence  (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444 .) “Unlike ‘unprofessional 
conduct,’ ‘evident unfitness for service’ connotes a fixed character trait, presumably 
not remediable merely on receipt of notice that one’ s conduct fails to meet the 
expectations of the employing school district.” ( Ibid.) 
4. Complainant did not prove  respondent is evidently unfit for service as a 
teacher. Specifically, complainant did not prove that respondent is unsuitable for 
teaching based on a temperamental defect, inadequacy, or irremediable fixed 
character trait.  Therefore, complainant did not establish by clear and convincing 
evidence that cause exists to discipline respondent’s credentials  for evident unfitness 
for service pursuant to Education Code section 44421 . 
5. The Commission may discipline a credential “for any cause that would 
have warranted the denial of an application for a credential or the renewal thereof.” 
(Ed. Code, § 44421.) An application for a credential may be denied if the applicant “ [i]s 
addicted to the use of intoxicating beverages to excess .” (Ed. Code, § 44345, subd. ( c).) 
It is undisputed that respondent is an alcoholic. Therefore, complainant established by 
clear and convincing evidence that cause exists to discipline respondent’s  credential s 
based on her addict ion to us ing alcohol  to excess  pursuant to Education Code section 
44421, as that statute relates to Education Code section 44345, subdivision ( c). 
Appropriate Discipline Based on the Morrison  Factors 
6. As explained above, c ause exists to discipline respondent’s credentials for 
unprofessional conduct and her addiction to using alcohol to excess. However,  as 
discussed in Factual Findings 32 through 35, respondent’s actions were not so extreme 
or harmful as to indicate  she is unfit to teach. As such,  outright revocation of her 
credentials is not the only manner of protecting the public. Rather, consistent with 16 respondent ’s evidence of rehabilitation , her credentials should be suspended , but that 
suspension  should be stayed for five years, subject to appropriate probationary terms 
and conditions. During that time, the Commission can  monitor respondent’s conduct 
to ensure she maintains h er sobriety . 
ORDER  
All credentials issued to respondent Ashleigh Fuchs are hereby suspended for 
one year. However, the suspension is stayed, and respondent’s credentials are placed 
on probation for five years under the following terms and conditions. Any new 
credential or authorization issued to respondent during the period of probation shall also be su spended, the suspension  stayed, and will be subject to the same terms and 
conditions of probation during the period of probation.  
SEVERABILITY CLAUSE: Each condition of probation contained herein is a 
separate and distinct condition. If any condition of probation is declared 
unenforceable in whole, in part, or to any extent, the remaining conditions of 
probation, and each of them, shall not be affected. Each condition of probation shall 
separately be valid and enforceable to the fullest extent permitted by law . 
1. Respondent shall obey all federal, state, and local laws and regulations, 
including, but not limited to, the statutes and regulations of the Commission. A full 
and detailed account of any and all arrests or citations for any violation of law (except 
minor traffic offenses) shall be reported by respondent to the Commission, in writing 
within 30 days of the arrest or citation.  
2. Respondent shall fully comply with the terms and conditions of this order 
and cooperate with representatives of the Commission and her assigned probation 17 compliance monitor (monitor) in the monitoring and investigation of her compliance. 
Respondent shall participate in a telephone or in -person review of the probation terms 
with respondent’s monitor within 14 calendar days of the mailing of the monitor’s 
written request.  
3. Respondent shall notify the monitor of her current mailing address, email 
address, and telephone number where voicemail or text message may be sent. Respondent shall notify the monitor in writing within 72 hours of any change of 
mailing address, email address, or telephone number.  
4. Respondent shall report to the Commission quarterly on a schedule 
designated by the Commission or the monitor. Reports shall be made either in person 
or in writing, as directed. Among other requirements as determined by the 
Commission, respondent shall st ate in each report under penalty of perjury whether 
she has complied with all the terms and conditions of probation.  
5. Respondent shall submit to the monitor a full and detailed written 
account of any and all arrests or citations for any violation of law in California or any 
other state, except minor traffic offenses, within three business days of the arrest or 
citation.  
6. Respondent shall notify her monitor in writing of the name and address 
of her current employer within 14 calendar days after the written request to participate 
in a review of her probation terms is mailed by respondent’s monitor. If respondent is 
currentl y employed in a position that requires her to have a California teaching 
credential, respondent shall provide a copy of the Decision and Order to her employer 
and immediate supervisor within five days of its effective date. If respondent changes 18 employment during the probationary period, she must provide a copy of the Decision 
and Order to each new employer.  
Respondent  shall notify her monitor in writing within three business days of the 
cessation of any employment that requires a California teaching credential or change of employment that requires her to have a California teaching credential. The 
notification shall con tain a detailed description of the circumstances surrounding the 
termination and/or change of employment.  
7. Respondent shall completely abstain from the possession of, 
consumption of, or use of alcohol and /or controlled substances, except when ordered 
by a health care professional legally authorized to do so as part of documented 
medical treatment. Respondent shall provide documentation of prescriptions, 
recommendations, orders, and treatment plans of health c are professionals for the use 
of these prohibited substances within five days following the request of the monitor.  
8. Respondent shall submit to bodily fluid testing for the presence of 
alcohol and/ or controlled substances at the request of respondent’s employer, 
immediate supervisor, or law enforcement. In addition, respondent shall, at her expense, fully cooperate with the Commission or any of its representatives, including 
the monitor, during the period of probation and shall, when requested, submit to such 
tests and samples as the Commission or the monitor may require for the detection of 
alcohol and/ or controlled s ubstances. Failure or refusal to submit to testing, a positive 
test, or two diluted test results during the period of probation shall constitute a 
violation of probation.  
9. Respondent shall execute and submit to the monitor any release of 
information forms that the Commission may require to monitor her compliance with 19 the terms of probation, including but not limited to the release of information forms 
concerning the results of bodily fluid testing performed by third parties.  
10. Respondent shall maintain an active, current credential with the 
Commission, including during any period of suspension.  
11. Respondent shall attend addiction support group meeting, such as AA, at 
least twice per month. Respondent shall provide proof of attendance with each 
quarterly report that respondent submits during the period of probation.  
12. Failure to comply with the terms of probation shall constitute a violation 
of probation. If respondent violations any term or condition of her probation, the 
Commission may refer the matter to the Attorney General ’s Office to file a petition to 
revoke probation, and after giving respondent notice and an opportunity to be heard, 
may set aside the stay order and impose the stayed discipline. If during the period of 
probation a petition to revoke probation has been fil ed against respondent’s 
credentials, the probationary period shall automatically be extended and shall not 
expire until final action is taken on the petition by the Commission.  
13. Upon successful completion of probation, respondent’s credential and 
certificates/authorizations shall be fully restored . 
 
DATE:  September 4, 2025  
SEAN GAVIN  
Administrative Law Judge  
Office of Administrative Hearings
 
