BEFORE THE  
COMMISSION ON TEACHER CREDENTIALING  
STATE OF CALIFORNIA  
In the Matter of  the Accusation A gainst : 
MARIO LORENZO MACHADO,  Respondent  
Agency Case No. 2 -661400748  
OAH No. 2025030802  
PROPOSED DECISION  
Sean Gavin , Administrative Law Judge, Office of Administrative Hearings (OAH), 
State of California, heard this matter by videoconference from September 23 through 
25, 2025,  from Sacramento , California . 
Phillip L. Arthur , Deputy Attorney General, represented Mary Vixie Sandy, Ed.D. , 
(complainant),  Executive Officer of the Commission on Teacher Credentialing  
(Commission ). 
Andrea Price, Attorney at Law, represented re spondent Mario Lorenzo Machado  
(respondent) , who was present throughout the hearing . 
Evidence was received , the record  closed , and the parties submitted the matter 
for decision on September 25, 2025 . 2 FACTUAL FINDINGS  
Jurisdictional Matters  
RESPONDENT ’S CREDENTIALS  
1. On April 20, 1998, the Commission issued respondent an Emergency 30-
Day Substitute Teaching Permit . That permit expired on May 1, 1999. On May 3, 1999, 
the Commission issued respondent another Emergency 30 -Day Substitute Teaching . 
That permit expired on June  1, 2000, and has not been renewed.  
2. On August 1, 2000, the Commission issued respondent a District Intern 
Credential . That credential expired on September 1, 2002, and has not been renewed.  
3. On August 1, 2002, the Commission issued respondent a Clear Single 
Subject Teaching Credential . Apart from a brief period between September 1 and 4, 
2012, respondent has continually renewed t his credential, which is scheduled to expire 
on October 1, 2027, unless renewed . 
4. On August 1, 2005, the Commission issued respondent an Emergency 
Crosscultural, Language, and Academic Development Certificate . That credential 
expired on September 1, 2006, and has not been renewed.  
5. On March 1, 2008, the Commission issued respondent a Clear 
Crosscultural, Language, and Academic Certificate. That certificate does not expire.  3 RESPONDENT ’S EMPLOYMENT , STUDENT COMPLAINT , AND TITLE IX 
INVESTIGATION  
6. Between 2003 and mid- 2021, respondent worked as an eighth -grade  
teacher at Oakdale Elementary School (Oakdale) in what is now known as the Twin 
Rivers School District (District). Starting in  mid-2021 , respondent worked as an English 
Language Arts (ELA)  teacher and wrestling coach at Foothill High School ( Foothill) , also 
in the District.  He worked at Foothill until June 30, 2024, when he resigned.  
7. On May 27, 2022, HT, a student in respondent’s ELA class, filed a sexual 
harassment complaint against respondent with the District under a federal law known 
as Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 (Title IX). Title IX  generally prohibits 
educational entities that receive federal funds, including the District, from 
discrimin ating based on sex . The District hired a third- party investigator to investigate  
HT’s complaint.  
8. The investigator interviewed HT and several other students and prepared 
notes of their statements. Complainant did not introduce the investigator’s notes or 
findings into evidence at hearing. In August 2023, the District dismiss ed the Title IX 
complaint because “ the conduct alleged in the Formal Compliant, even if true, would 
not constitute Title IX Sexual Harassment as defined in the Federal Title IX 
Regulations. ” 
9. Following the Title IX investigation, the investigator notified Jordan 
Alvarado, the District’s Human Resources Director at the time, that many students , 
including HT,  had raised concerns about respondent’s behavior that were outside the 
scope of the Title IX complaint. As a result, on October 31, 2023, Ms. Alvarado  4 interviewed respondent. She  read the students’ allegations  to respondent and  then 
handwrote his responses.  
10. Thereafter, Ms. Alvarado prepared an undated Investigation Report. The 
report consisted of Ms. Alvarado’s findings  and her notes from  respondent’s interview. 
Ms. Alvarado did not interview any of the students. Instead, she based her findings on 
her review of notes from the students’ interviews during the Title IX investigation . She 
does not know who interviewed the students or who prepared the notes.  
ACCUSATION  AND NOTICE OF DEFENSE  
11. On March 4 , 202 5, complainant , acting solely in her official capacity, 
signed and thereafter filed an Accusation seeking to discipline respondent’s credentials , certificates, and authorizations  (collectively, respondent’s Credentials) . The 
Accusation incorporates many of the allegations included in Ms. Alvarado’s 
investigation report. Generally, c omplainant alleged that during the  2021- 2022 school 
year, while working as an ELA  teacher and wrestling coach at Foothill , respondent 
engaged in inappropriate conduct toward several students.  Complainant further 
alleged that on one occasion prior to the 2021- 2022 school, while working as an 
eighth -grade  teacher at Oakdale , respondent hit a student in the testicles with the 
back of his hand, a n action  referred to as “sack tapping.”  Based on those allegations, 
complainant seeks  to discipline respondent’s Credentials for unprofessional conduct, 
evident unfitness for service, immoral conduct, and acts involving moral turpitude.  
12. Respondent timely filed a Notice of Defense in which he r equested a 
hearing and r aised  three affirmative defenses. First, respondent objected to the form 
of the Accusation as indefinite and uncertain. Second, respondent objected that the 
Accusation alleged acts older than four years, in violation of Education Code section 5 44242.7. Finally, respondent objected that the Accusation does not state acts  upon 
which the Commission can proceed.  
Format  of the Accusation and Decision  
13. Complainant formatted  the Accusation based on allegations made by 
several students, each of whom is identified by their initials to preserve their 
anonymity . In support of those allegations, many of those students testified at hearing.  
Additionally, complainant submitted into evidence Ms. Alvarado’s i nvestigation report . 
14. Through his testimony a t hearing and in his written submissions to the 
District , respondent admitted some allegations but  denied others. For the allegations 
that he admitted, respondent testified or wrote about the circumstances underlying 
the events and his actions.  
15. This Decision  will follow the same format  as the Accusation. For each of 
the students’ allegations, the Decision will identify the  supporting evidence, if any, 
followed by respondent’s admission, denial, or explanation. T o the extent the 
allegations require credibility determination s, those findings will follow.  Finally, t he 
significance of respondent’s proven conduct will be  discussed in the section titled 
“Summary of Respondent’s Conduct and Analysis of Morrison  Factors” below.  
Allegations, Evidence at Hearing, and Credibility Findings  
STUDENT HT 
GoGuardian Text Messages  
16. Complainant alleged:  6 On or about December 17, 2021, while HT was working in a 
Google document during her chemistry class, she noticed 
Respondent monitoring her computer through the District’ s 
GoGuardian Teacher Chat application. Respondent engaged 
in an inappropriate text message exchange with HT and 
made disparaging and demeaning comments about HT ’s 
arms and head.  
17. GoGuardian is a  computer application  educators can use to monitor and 
communicate with students. Respondent submitted into evidence screenshots of the  
GoGuardian correspondence in question. HT posted the screenshots to her Instagram 
account with her own captions. The screenshots appear to capture the conversation at 
some point after it began.  It is unclear if the conversation continued after the final 
screenshotted message.  
18. The first message visible in the screenshots is from respondent to HT: 
“you’ve got raptor arms. you can only throw hands if I’m 8 inches away.”  HT took a 
screenshot of that message and posted it on her Instagram account with the caption, 
“Mr. Machado thought he was being hella funny today .” 
19. HT then replied  to respondent , in three separate messages : “bet,” “Come 
on,” and “ at 5 in the alley behind carl’s juinor [ sic].” Respondent wrote back, “Here’s 
your baby pictures” with a link to a webpage showing the hands of two children with symbrachydactyly, a congenital deformity characterized by underdeveloped or missing 
fingers, sometimes referred to as “nubbins.”  HT posted a screenshot of the webpage 
on her Instagram account with the caption, “ this was the link that he sent m e….” 7 20. A few minutes later, respondent wrote to HT again, saying, “ You want me 
to shine up your forehead? Or is it a fivehead?” HT replied, “it’s a seven head.”  
Respondent wrote, “Sounds about right,” to which HT responded, “if your gonna insult 
me do it right,” followed by the correction, “you’re.” Respondent wrote back, “ True, 
you do have a ginormous head but I didn’t want to squash your self -esteem.” HT 
posted a screenshot of this exchange to Instagram with the caption, “… :/”  near the 
bottom.  
21. HT then wrote back to respondent, “get back to wok,” followed by the 
correction, “work.” Respondent replied, “wok/  was that an asian racial slur?” HT 
responded, “noooooooooooo.” She then wrote, “your [ sic] like if danny davito had an 
evil t hug twin.” The screenshots end there. In total, the screenshots cover eight 
minutes of messages.  
22. At hearing, HT acknowledged that she and respondent “teased” each 
other back and forth  during the GoGuardian exchange . However, she explained she 
was uncomfortable. In particular, she found it inappropriate to make fun of disabilities 
such as symbrachydactyly. She also found respondent’s comments to be flirtatious . 
23. Respondent testified that he occasionally used GoGuardian to monitor 
his students while they were in his class and in other classes. GoGuardian allows 
teachers to view what is on their students’ screens at any given time. When a teacher 
accesses a class roster, it shows all the students in that class and a thumbnail view of 
their current screens. If he noticed that a student appeared to be watching something 
unrelated to school, he would remind them to return to doing schoolwork. In January 
2023, he wrote a letter responding to the Title IX complai nt in which he explained his 
GoGuardian use. He wrote, in relevant part:  8 In the [Title IX] allegations, it claims that I went o n Go 
Guardian  during sixth period. On occasion, I would use Go 
Guardian  to ensure that students enrolled in my classes  
were on task. Sadly, on many occasions, students were not 
and I would prompt them to get back on task; if not the 
assignment in their current class, then for them to do the 
work in my class. I never singled out [HT]  nor messaged 
beyond that extent.  
24. In May 2023, Ms. Price, on behalf of respondent, submitted a letter to the 
District as a follow -up to respondent’s previous written response to the Title IX 
complaint. In her letter, Ms. Price noted respondent no longer had access to GoGuardian. However, she further noted that he had since received and reviewed  the 
specific exchange in question and “ after reviewing the screenshots, he does now 
remember these messages. While these messages were not school related, none of the 
contents were remotely sexual in  nature. As Mr. Machado previously stated, he jokes 
around with his students frequently. ” 
25. At hearing, respondent confirmed  that he used GoGuardian to monitor 
his students , although he typically focused on members of the wrestling team because 
if their grade point averages were too low, they could not wrestle. He characterized his 
exchange with HT as a typical example of banter he and his students used. He did not 
intend to hurt her feelings, nor did he think she intended to hurt his. He valued his 
relationship with his students and believed being friendly and approachable improved 
his teaching e ffectiveness and his students’ learning outcomes.  In his written response 
to the Title IX complaint, respondent wrote, in relevant part, “ My relationship with [HT]  9 is the same as my relationship with all other students in my classes. I laugh and joke 
with all my students. ” 
26. There is no dispute as to the contents of respondent’s GoGuardian 
messages with HT. Respondent’s testimony that the exchange was an example of 
laughing and joking with a student was credible . HT’s Instagram captions were 
consistent with that characterization.  
Hug and Comment About Missing HT  
27. Complainant alleged:  
On or about January 31, 2022, Respondent initiated and 
gave HT a full front- facing hug that lasted a few seconds 
and said to HT, “ I missed you so much. ” HT found this hug 
to be  “tight ” and felt like an embrace. HT perceived the 
embrace and Respondent ’s comment as very personal, 
which took HT “ off guard ” and caused HT to feel 
uncomfortable. This incident caused HT to change how she interacted with Respondent. HT saw Respondent hug another female student, student L, the same way he hugged 
HT on or about Janua ry 31, 2022.  
28. HT testified at hearing consistently with the Accusation. She explained 
she had just returned to school after an extended absence due to COVID -19. In her 
opinion, respondent seemed “overjoyed with emotion” to see her. She acknowledged 
she hugged respondent back but noted she felt uncomfortable because the hug was 
from the front, whereas their previous hugs were from the side and briefer . She 
observed respondent hug many other students on multiple occasions . She  does not 10 think  it is appropriate in general for teachers to hug students , and s he believed  the 
hug violated her personal space . 
29. In his written response to the Title IX complaint, respondent wrote, in 
relevant part:  
As for being "noticeably happy" when [HT]  came to class 
and allegedly giving her a "tight hug", th is is also factually 
inaccurate. I don't know what "noticeably happy" means in 
this context. I greet all my students cheerfully. I was told 
when I first got into teaching that my greeting may be the 
only positive words some of these kids receive, so I greet ALL OF THEM positively and cheerfully, reminding them 
that I was glad that they were there.  
30. Respondent further explained in his written response:  
In addition, as I have to hold the door to my classroom open (there is no door stop), my back would have been to 
the door and the only way to hug a student would be if 
they approached me. I know I would never hug a student 
other than from the side, so if [HT]  claims that this occurred, 
based upon the circumstances, she would have had to 
initiate any hug as my back was against the door.  
31. At hearing, respondent explained he does not specifically recall hugging 
HT on the day in question. However, he confirmed that he occasionally hugged 
students. He also acknowledged that he habitually said to students who returned from 
an absence, “we misse d you so much. Class isn’t the same without you.” He learned 11 that phrase while training to be a teacher and believes it conveys to students that their 
presence is important and valued.  
32. HT’s testimony that respondent hugged her and expressed missing her 
was credible. Respondent did not deny the conduct and acknowledged hugging 
students , though he does not recall the specific event. Respondent credibly explained 
that he routinely told students “w e missed you so much. Class isn’t the same without 
you.” 
“Do I Need to Beat Someone’s Ass?” Comment  
33. Complainant alleged:  
On or about April 1, 2022, HT entered Respondent’ s class 
tardy and upset. HT informed Respondent she was upset 
over an interaction with a substitute teacher in the previous period. In response, Respondent stated, “ Do I need to beat 
someone's ass? ” HT perceived Respondent's comment as 
flirtatious.  
34. HT testified at hearing consistently with the Accusation. She believes the 
comment indicated respondent was physically attracted to her . 
35. In his written response to the Title IX complaint, respondent explained HT 
arrived to class late and appeared upset. He asked to talk to her at his desk to give her privacy . He wrote,  in relevant part:  “[HT]  told me she was upset with the substitute 
teacher who covered my class (apparently the substitute upset many students), I made 
the comment ‘ Whose  ass do I need to kick? ’ in jest to alleviate the stress of that 
situation. [HT] laughed and class resumed. ” 12 36. At hearing, r espondent testified consistently with his written statement. 
He denied making the comment to flirt or express romantic interest.  
37. There is no dispute that respondent made the alleged comment to HT.  
Although HT credibly testified that she perceived the comment to be flirtatious, 
respondent credibly explained  he did not mean the comment t hat way.  
“You Have Three Holes” Comment  
38. Complainant alleged:  
On or about April 29, 2022, students in Respondent’ s class 
were working on an assignment which involved defining the 
vocabulary used in a short story. One of the words the class 
was asked to discuss was “ whole. ” During HT ’s discussion 
with classmates, she jokingly said “ three wholes. ” 
Respondent interjected himself into the conversation 
stating to HT, “ You have three holes, ” in a manner loud 
enough so that multiple students in the class could hear. HT interpreted Respondent ’s comment as using the word 
“hole” instead of “ whole ” and perceived the comment as 
referring to female anatomy and “ their three holes. ” HT 
stated the comment felt sexual and flirtatious, and made her feel uncomfortable. Female student AH corroborated 
HT’s account of the incident and stated that she also had 
concerns about Respondent acting flirtatious with HT and felt uncomfortable by the comment. Female student YJ 
indicated that when Respondent made the comment, the 13 entire class responded, "Ewww." YJ said that HT looked at 
her “red with embarrassment ” and put her head down for 
the remainder of class.  
39. HT testified at hearing consistently with the Accusation. Respondent’s 
comment made her feel “mortified” and she “wanted to disappear.”  
40. AH did not testify at hearing. YJ  testified that respondent seemed to be 
“more playful” and “target” HT with his remarks more than other students , but she did 
not testify about t his specific allegation.  
41. In his written response to the Title IX complaint, r espondent  explained 
that he was showing his class how to search for a word with an electronic document. 
To demonstrate, he used one of the vocabulary words, “whole,” which appeared three 
times in the short story they were studying.  He wrote, in relevant part:  
As the majority class was trying to master the word search 
skill, [HT] was laughing with her friends and said “ You have 
three wh oles!”, loudl y enough for the entire class to hear. 
This garnered laughter from her friends. I repeated what she said "You have three wholes" and adding, "Don't be 
weird!" Class instruction resumed, as I continued to teach 
this skill.  
42. At hearing, respondent testified consistently with his written statement. 
He understands in retrospect why HT would be upset, but he did not mean to refer to 
her anatomy.  He made the comment to “shut down that line of conversation.”  14 43. There is no dispute that respondent made the comment as alleged. 
Although HT credibly testified that she was mortified  about the remark , respondent 
credibly explained he did not mean t o embarrass her. Rather, he hoped to end the 
disruption. He also credibly explained that in hindsight, he can see why HT would be 
upset, and he regrets handling the situation as he did.  
“What is in Your Belly Button?” Comment  
44. Complainant alleged:  
On or about April 29, 2022, as HT was leaving Respondent ’s 
classroom, Respondent called out loudly to HT, who was 
wearing a crop top shirt, “ What is in your belly button?, ” 
referring to HT ’s belly button piercing. HT perceived the 
comment as sexual in nature given that Respondent asked her this question about her exposed stomach area soon after he made the “ three holes ” comment to her. HT missed 
approximately two weeks from school following the incident because she was experiencing anxiety.  
45. HT testified at hearing consistently with the Accusation. She explained 
that respondent commented about her appearance daily. In her experience, 
respondent commented about every student’s appearance unless they made it clear not to do so. At first, HT found respondent’s remarks funny, but over time she grew to 
find them teasing, bullying, and in disregard of appropriate boundaries.  
46. In his written response to the Title IX complaint, r espondent  denied 
commenting about HT’s belly piercing. He explained that he saw another student with 
a similar piercing and cringed because it reminded him of an event years earlier when 15 he witnessed a soccer player have her belly piercing torn from her body during a 
game. A different student who saw respondent’s reaction asked about it, and 
respondent explained his previous experience.  At hearing, s tudent BT testified  that 
they heard respondent tell student MT  to be careful about her belly piercing because 
he had seen one ripped out once.  BT understood the comment to be cautionary.  
47. Respondent further  wrote that, at the time of that conversation, HT was 
in the class but not a participant. Additionally, respondent did not know at that time 
that HT had a belly piercing.  Respondent ’s testimony at hearing w as consistent with 
his Title IX response letter.  
48. HT credibly testified that she heard respondent say, “ What is in your belly 
button? ” or similar words to that effect.  However, s he did not explain her basis for 
believing  respondent directed his question to her , apart from respondent’s habit of 
regularly commenting about her appearance. But she also acknowledged that 
respondent routinely remarked about many students’ appearances.  
49. Respondent, on the other hand, credibly explained the circumstances 
under which he discussed a belly piercing. He specifically recalled the event and the 
details surrounding the conversation. Respondent’s explanation of those details was 
persuasive  and consistent with BT ’s testimony.  
“Sweetheart,” “Baby Girl,”  and “Hun” Comments  
50. Complainant alleged that during the 2021-2022 school year, respondent 
referred to multiple female students, including HT  and YJ , as “ sweetheart, ” “baby girl, ” 
and “hun.” 16 51. HT testified at hearing consistently with the Accusation. She explained 
respondent called her “sweetheart” nearly every time he saw her. She also observed 
him use the terms “honey,” “sweetheart,” and “baby girl” to and about other students 
and teachers. In her opinion, respondent tried to “sexualize every conversation he 
would have with a woman.”  
52. YJ testified that she recalled on e time respondent called her “baby girl” 
and three times he called other students that term. In her opinion, respondent used it 
as “a term of endearment.” She “didn’t feel weird about it” personally, but understands 
why others might.  
53. Student ED testified at hearing that she recalled respondent calling girls 
“sweetheart.” She interpreted respondent’s remarks to be made “in a fatherly way,” not 
romantically.  
54. At hearing, r espondent  denied using the term “sweetheart,“ but 
acknowledged calling students “sweetie,” “hun,” and “baby girl.” He said “sweetie” and 
“hun” were words he heard regularly as a child growing up in Biloxi, Mississippi. He 
used the terms to be “like a caring father figure.” He found it “hard to view them just 
as students,” and viewed them “ more like [ his] kids.” He said “baby girl” a few times 
because he heard other students saying it and wanted to connect with them, but it did 
not feel natural so he stopped. No one ever asked him not to use any of those terms. 
He would have honored that request if anyone made it.  
55. HT, YJ, and ED credibly testified that respondent called them and other 
students terms like “sweetheart,” “honey,” and “baby girl.”  Respondent acknowledged 
as much and credibly explained he meant those terms in a fatherly  way, rather than 
romantically. That was consistent with how YJ and ED interpreted his intent.  17 STUDENT YJ 
Comments about HT’s Clothes and Hair Color  
56. Complainant alleged:  
During the 2021-2022 school year, female student YJ 
observed Respondent pick on Student HT ’s clothes and hair 
color. According to YJ, Respondent engaged in this 
behavior with Student HT more than other students and 
Respondent behaved like an “ inappropriate uncle ” toward 
Student HT.  
57. YJ testified at hearing consistently with the Accusation. She explained 
respondent seemed to be “more playful” and “target” HT with his remarks more than other students.  She recalled that respondent told HT her shorts were too short. YJ 
believed the frequency of respondent’s remarks about HT’s clothing and appearance was inappropriate and made HT feel bad.  
58. At hearing, r espondent  denied commenting about HT’s clothing. 
Although he did not recall any specific incidents, he explained he would have only 
discussed her clothing t o enforce the school’s dress code.  
59. YJ credibly testified that respondent commented about HT’s clothing and 
appearance. She  readily  recalled the specific comment about HT’s shorts. In 
conjunction with HT’s testimony, respondent’s comments to HT on GoGuardian , and 
respondent’s  other admitted teasing and joking with students, YJ’s  testimony on this 
point was more credible than respondent’s.  18 Questions About YJ’s Sexual Assault  
60. Complainant alleged:  
During the 2021-2022 school year, after Respondent 
learned that YJ had been sexually assaulted by another 
student, Respondent repeatedly asked YJ questions about 
the incident and the male student who assaulted her. Respondent's ongoing questioning humiliat ed YJ.  
61. At hearing, YJ explained the person who assaulted her was a classmate 
who briefly lived in YJ’s family home. After the assault, the other student moved out and stopped attending Foothill. When respondent took attendance and that student 
was absent, respondent would re gularly ask YJ if she knew his whereabouts . This 
embarrassed YJ.  
62. On cross- examination, YJ explained she was upset with respondent 
because she believed he knew why the other student was no longer in class but 
continued to ask YJ about him anyway. She believed all teachers were notified, but she 
did not know any details about the timing or details of the notification. She confirmed that once she talked to respondent and asked him not to mention the other student to 
her anymore, he immediately stopped . 
63. Ms. Alvarado asked about this allegation when she interviewed 
respondent in October 2023. According to her interview notes, respondent did not 
recall receiving any email notification about the reason for the other student’s 
absence.  He acknowledged that when YJ told him about the incident, he asked “basic 
details,” such as whether the other student was still in the family home with YJ. He also 
referred YJ to counseling.  They did not discuss the matter afterwards.  19 64. Respondent’s statements to Ms. Alvarado were consistent with his 
testimony a t hearing . At hearing, h e explained he asked enough questions of YJ to 
determine whether law enforcement was already involved to know  whether he needed 
to make a mandated report. H e also confirmed that he did not know the reason for 
the other student’s absence until YJ told him.  
65. YJ and respondent agreed that after YJ told respondent that the other 
student assaulted her, respondent asked a few questions and then never brought it up 
again. Under the circumstances, respondent’s testimony that he asked enough 
questions to determine whether he needed to make a mandate report was credible.  
Respondent’s Attempt to Trip YJ  
66. Complainant alleged, “ During the 2021-2022 school year, Respondent 
tried to trip YJ. ” At hearing, YJ testified th at respondent “playfully” stuck his foot out as 
he held the door open for YJ  once or twice . She never believed respondent was “really 
trying to trip students,” but rather was joking about doing it.  
67. Respondent testified consistently with YJ at hearing. He confirmed he 
sometimes put his foot out to block a student’s path, but only ever did so in an 
exaggerated and playful way. He never actually tripped or tried to trip YJ or any other 
student.  
68. Both YJ and respondent credibly testifie d that respondent never truly 
tried to trip her. Rather, he joked about doing so.  20 “Stop Being an A sshole ” or “Stop Dicking Around ” 
Comments  
69. Complainant alleged, “ During the 2021-2022 school year, YJ heard 
Respondent tell another student to ‘ stop being an asshole ’ or ‘stop dicking around. ’” 
70. YJ testified at hearing consistently with the Accusation. She said the 
comments were two of respondent’s “many catchphrases” and explained  he said them 
“pretty often,” or about once or twice a day. At first, she found it surprising, but she 
was not offended by it. In her opinion, respondent never once said something like that 
in anger. He only ever did so “playfully.”  
71. At hearing, r espondent denied telling students “stop being an asshole” or 
“stop dicking around.” H owever, h e acknowledged saying similar things, mostly to 
members of the wrestling team. Specifically, he confirmed he said, “don’t be an ass,” 
“stop screwing around,” or “stop jerking around.” He wanted to make sure the 
wrestlers did not get into trouble and lose their eligibility to stay on the team.  
72. YJ credibly testified that respondent said “stop being an asshole” or “stop 
dicking around” to students . Based on  respondent’s other admitted teasing and joking 
with students  and his admission that he said words that were quite similar to those 
that YJ reported, YJ’s testimony on this point was more credible than respondent’s.  
STUDENT CB 
73. Complainant alleged “ During the 2021-2022 school year, male student 
CB would joke back and forth with Respondent. During these exchanges, Respondent 
called CB an ‘ Oompa Loompa. ’” Complainant further alleged “ CB heard Respondent 
joke with other students, calling students nicknames and ugly. ” 21 74. CB did not testify at hearing.  Apart from the terms “ sweetheart, ” “baby 
girl,” and “hun,” as discussed above, n o other witness ed confirmed th at respondent 
used nicknames for students. There was no evidence that respondent called any 
students ugly.  
STUDENT MT 
Comments About MT’s Body and Clothing  
75. Complainant alleged : 
During the 2021-2022 school year, female student MT, who was wearing a crop top shirt which exposed her midriff, 
went to Respondent's desk in front of the class to retrieve a 
restroom pass. Respondent said to her, “ Here you go big 
belly. ” MT gasped and thought to herself at the time, “ Why 
is he looking? ” Respondent ’s insulting comment, directed at 
MT regarding her body size in front of the class, caused her to feel uncomfortable and embarrassed.  
76. Complainant further alleged: “ During the 2021- 2022 school year, 
Respondent commented on MT ’s clothing and told her to ‘ put a shirt on ’ when she 
was wearing a sports bra and shorts on her way to work out. ” 
Lifting MT Off the Ground By Her Ankle  
77. Complaint also alleged:  
During the 2021-2022 school year, female student MT was 
on the mats in the gym where wrestling practice took place. 22 While Respondent was talking to MT, MT did a handstand 
and Respondent picked her up by her right ankle, lifted her 
completely off the ground, and held her upside down for 
approximately three seconds. MT was shocked, “freaked out 
a little bit,” and told Res pondent to put her down.  
78. Complainant included the two sets of allegations regarding MT under 
separate headings. As a result, it was not clear from the evidence whether these 
allegations involved the same student or two students with the same initials. In either 
case, no student with the initials MT  testified at hearing.  
79. Ms. Alvarado asked about both allegations when she interviewed 
respondent in October 2023. According to her interview notes, respondent denied 
making the comments to MT. He said, “You can’t body shame people like that. 
Especially females.”  
80. Regarding grabbing or lifting MT by her ankle, respondent told Ms . 
Alvarado he did not do that, and that physically lifting someone by the ankle that way 
would not be physically possible for him. He recalled one time that a student was 
doing a flip and almost kicked him. He caught the student’s ankle to protect himself, 
but he does not know if that was MT. Respondent testified consistently with those 
statements at hearing.  
81. There was no evidence that respondent made comments about MT’s 
body or clothing as alleged. Respondent’s testimony that he did not lift MT by her ankle was credible.  23 STUDENT DR 
82. Complainant alleged : “During the 2021-2022 school year, Respondent 
made comments to male students on the wrestling team, including male student DR, 
that they were ‘ a little chunky ’ and ‘looking a little chub ’ in front of other students in 
class. ” 
83. DR testified at hearing . He explained  he confided in respondent about 
feeling insecure with his weight. He felt comfortable talking to respondent because of 
his general attitude and because respondent is also “a larger man.”  Respondent 
helped reassure DR that he was gaining weight “in the right places” as he developed. 
Their conversation was private  and not in front of other students.  
84. DR also testified that he heard respondent refer to other students , mostly 
those on the wrestling team,  as “fatty,”  “big,” or “pig.” Respondent called DR “big” one 
time. DR was not offended  and thought it was playful. In DR’s opinion, if other 
students were offended, they needed to “take the joke better.”  
85. At hearing,  respondent denied calling students “fatty ,” “big,” or “ pig.” He 
confirmed he told the wrestlers if he thought they were “chunky” or looking “a little chub .” He did so to encourage them to take their health seriously and not gain too 
much weight between wrestling matches. In his opinion, it is unsafe for students to lose weight quickly to qualify for certain competitive brackets, a practice known as “weight cutting.” As a result, when he saw wrestlers eating candy or soda, he would 
ask “where’s your water?” or something similar to remind them to maintain a healthy 
weight the whole season. He never made the comments to shame the students and he does not believe they took the comments that way. He believes it is not only 24 appropriate but important for a wrestling coach to educate athletes about healthy 
weight and diet considerations.  
86. It is undisputed that respondent told wrestlers they were “a little chunky” 
or “looking a little chub.” Respondent credibly explained his motivations for doing so.  
STUDENT ED 
87. Complainant alleged : “During the 2021-2022 school year, female student 
ED overheard Respondent ask another female student, ‘Do you get a lot of guys in 
school?’”  
88. ED testified at hearing consistently with the Accusation.  She did not recall 
the student to whom respondent asked the question. Though she was not involved in the conversation, ED was uncomfortable.  
89. Respondent denied asking any student whether she got a lot of guys in 
schools. He was adamant that he “would never say that.”  
90. ED appeared to genuinely believe that she overheard respondent’s 
comment as alleged. However, given that she was not part of the conversation, did not 
know other details of the interaction, and did not recall the target of the question, her testimony was not persuasive. On the other hand, respondent credibly denied making 
such a comment. In light of respondent’s demeanor, combined with his ready 
admission of many other alleged comments, his testimony was credible that he did not 
make the comment as alleged.  25 STUDENT BT 
Comments About Transgender Identity  
91. Complainant alleged:  
During the 2021-2022 school year, Respondent made 
comments to students regarding transgender people that 
were inappropriate and perceived by students, including 
transgender student BT, as insensitive. The comments 
included, “If transgender women can go and  play in 
women ’s sports, then I can go and wrestle a ten -year old 
because I identify as being a ten -year- old,” and “You can 
always tell the true gender of people based on the way they act.” 
92. BT testified at hearing consistently with the Accusation. BT often ate 
lunch in respondent’s classroom because he was BT’s “favorite teacher” and BT “ felt 
comfortable expressing [ themselves ] with him.” BT and another student, AC, were 
eating lunch in respondent’s classroom when he made the comments in question.  BT 
was struggling with their gender identity at the time and found the comment about 
transgender athletes upsetting.  
93. At hearing, respondent admitted discussing transgender athletes with CB, 
a student on the wrestling team, in his classroom during a lunch period. He did not 
recall whether BT and AC were present, but  conceded  they could have been . 
Respondent explained he and CB  were discussing Fallon Fox, a mixed martial arts  
(MMA)  athlete  who was assigned male at birth but after puberty transitioned to female 
and competed against cisgender female athletes. Respondent and CB were discussing 26 the competitive fairness and potential risk to the cisgender athletes. Respondent 
explained that Fallon Fox likely had more muscle mass and denser bones, both of 
which could provide an unfair advantage in a combat sport like MMA. In his opinion, 
those advantages could also pose a threat to the safety of the other competitors. To 
draw a parallel, he said it would be as unfair and dangerous as if he wrestled a 10-
year-old. He testified he was not attempting to belittle transgender individuals or 
suggest gende r identity was a choice. Rather, he was attempting to illustrate his point 
about competitive fairness and athlete safety.  
94. BT further testified that, e ither at a different point in the conversation or 
on a different day, BT and AC told respondent they were mad at  DR, a student 
assigned female at birth but identifying as male.  Respondent replied, “see, you can 
always tell  someone’s true gender by the way they act,” or substantially similar words 
to that effect.  Respondent did not clarify what he meant, but BT understood the 
comment to mean that even though BT did not identify as female and DR identified as 
male, respondent was i mplying they were both female because they were arguing 
about something petty.  
95. At hearing, respondent denied making that comment. He ha d “no clue” 
what he might have said to give BT the impression that was what he said or meant. He 
recalled the conversation with BT and AC about DR. He told them , “you’re young. Stop 
making permanent decisions.” By that, he meant decisions about whether to keep or 
end friendships. He did not mean anything about gender identity.  
96. BT credibly testified that respondent discussed transgender athletes. 
Respondent credibly explained the context in which he made those comments and his 
meaning.  27 97. As to the comment about know ing someone’s true gender by how they  
act, although BT may have testified truthfully about their memory of  respondent’s 
approximate wording, BT speculated about respondent’s  meaning. Respondent 
credibly explained he did not say, and does not believe, that one can determine 
another ’s “true” gender by how they act.  
Respondent’s Misgendering of BT and DR  
98. Complainant further alleged:  
In or about August 2021, BT told Respondent that their 
preferred pronouns were “they/them.” Respondent continued to refer to BT by “her/she.” Respondent failed to 
use transgender student TR ’s (also known as DR), chosen 
name and pronouns and Respondent "mis -gendered" TR. 
This "irked" BT and students would correct Respondent.  
99. At hearing, BT testified th at they never specifically instructed respondent 
to use they/them pronouns. Rather, others used those pronouns for BT, and BT 
therefore believed respondent understood to use them as well. Additionally, BT noticed that respondent continued to use she/her pronouns for student DR even 
though student DR had requested that respondent use he/him pronouns. As a result, BT believed respondent was unreceptive to using an individual’s preferred pronouns.  
100. DR testified  at hearing that early in the 2021-2022 school year, he went 
by TR and used feminine pronouns. After announcing he would go by DR and use masculine pronouns,  respondent and many other teachers at Foothill continued to 
misgender him.  Respondent told DR he would try to use the correct name and 28 pronouns, but he sometimes failed to do so. He always apologized when DR corrected 
him. 
101. DR believes respondent was trying and “didn’t really care that much.” 
Eventually, respondent began to refer to DR by his last name, which was consistent 
throughout the school year.  DR was not offended by this approach. DR disagreed with 
the characterization that respondent “refused” to call him by his preferred pronouns.  
102. In his interview with Ms. Alvarado  and at hearing, r espondent  
acknowledged that he sometimes misgendered students BT and DR accidentally.  At 
hearing, he explained he received a roster at the beginning of the year from which he 
called attendance. The roster had the letter F, for female, next to BT ’s and DR’s names. 
He tried to remember to refer to each student by the appropriate pronouns, but he 
sometimes forgot , especially when seeing the letter designation on the attendance 
roster. He always apologized whe n a student pointed out his error. He does not 
believe any students believed he misgendered them purposefully.  
103. BT and DR credibly testified that respondent referred to them by the 
wrong pronouns. DR credibly testified that he did not believe respondent ever did so 
intentionally. BT’s belief that respondent was unreceptive to using the correct 
pronouns, even if held in good faith, was speculative. Respondent credibly testified 
that he only ever misgendered students accidentally. He also credible explained that 
he genuinely apologized  whenever a student corrected him.  
STUDENT AF 
104. Complainant alleged:  29 During the 2021-2022 school year, female student AF, who 
had never had Respondent as a teacher and had never 
interacted with Respondent before, was walking to her next 
class. Respondent was walking towards AF and as he passed 
AF from the side, Respondent s aid “move ” and then pushed 
AF in a forceful manner which caused AF to almost fall into 
the bushes.  
105. AF testified at hearing that respondent said “move” and pushed  her 
during a passing period. She was surprised and found it “weird,” given that she had 
never previously interacted with respondent. However, she knew he was a teacher at 
the school and therefore took his conduct as “playful.” The push did not harm her.  
106. At hearing, r espondent  explained he does not know AF and has no 
recollection of ever pushing her. He denied intentionally pushing any students. He noted that he was occasionally required to break up student fights  and would have to 
tell other students to “move” as he jostled through a crowd to access the fighters.  He 
suggested he may have made contact with A F under similar circumstances but does 
not know with any certainty.  
107. Although AF appeared to be truthful when she testified that respondent 
pushed her and said “move” during a passing period , respondent credibly testified he 
never intentionally pushed any students, but would sometimes have to make room to 
get to a fight.  Under the circumstances, the characterization that respondent “pushed 
AF in a forceful manner which caused AF to almost fall into the bushes,” as alleged in 
the Accusation, was less credible tha n respondent’s explanation.  30 STUDENTS EA, DE 0F1, AND CC – ALLEGATIONS OF “SACK TAPPING ” 
108. Complainant alleged: “During the 2021-2022 school year, male student 
EA observed Respondent ‘jokingly sack tap’ (hitting a male individual in their testicles) 
wrestling students on two occasions.”  Complainant further alleged that during the 
2021- 2022 school year, respondent “sack tapped” male student DE  two or three times, 
and DE observed respondent “sack tap” other male students. Additionally , complainant 
alleged that CC, a male eighth -grade student of respondent’s at Oakdale , “saw 
Respondent hit one of CC ’s male friends in the testicles with the back of Respondent’s 
palm on one occasion .” Finally, complainant alleged that during his interview with Ms. 
Alvarado, respondent admitted to “sack tapping” at Oakdale on one occasion.  
109. Students EA, DE, and CC did not testify at hearing. BT testified that 
respondent sometimes took “playful jabs” at students, usually involving  those on the 
wrestling team.  BT was a student assistant for the wrestling team and spent hours 
interacting with respondent and the wrestlers. In that context, BT saw respondent 
gesture toward wrestlers as if to sack tap them, but he never made contact.  
110. In his interview with Ms. Alvarado  and at hearing, r espondent denied 
sack tapping any students at Foothill. He acknowledged to Ms. Alvarado that he did it one time at Oakdale. Specifically, according to Ms. Alvarado’s notes, respondent said 
“One time the kids drug me into it. I was doing yard duty and one kid did it to me 
really hard and I did it to him back as a reflex.” Respondent confirmed those 
 
1 At hearing, complainant moved to amend the Accusation to correct Student 
DM to Student DE. Respondent did not object, the motion was granted, and the Accusation so amended by interlineation.  31 statements at hearing. He clarified that he did not intend to hurt the student, but 
rather reacted on instinct. If faced with that situation again, he would be more careful 
to control his reaction.  
111. When answering Ms. Alvarado’s questions, respondent could have easily 
lied about sack tapping a student at Oakdale.  Instead, he admitted doing so and 
credibly explained the underlying circumstances. Although the situation did not justify 
respondent’s behavior, his candor about the incident at Oakdale enhanced his 
credibility regarding the balance of the allegations. Given that respondent credibly 
denied sack tapping students at Foothill  and that no students testified otherwise, his 
statement that he only ever did so once while at Oakdale was credible.  
STUDENTS HT,  YJ, AND MT – ALLEGATIONS OF PUSHING STUDENTS  
112. Complainant alleged:  
During the 2021-2022 school year, students HT, YJ, and MT 
saw Respondent “playfully” push or shove students during 
class. As students walked into class, Respondent would 
sometimes “playfully ” hit the back of their head with his 
hand or push them from behind . 
113. MT did not testify at hearing. HT and YJ testi fied consistently with the 
Accusation. HT said  respondent would sometimes wrestle with the wrestling students 
or grab pressure points on their necks or elbows. He would also sometimes kick 
behind their knees. YJ said respondent sometimes playfully pushed or bumped into 
students. She found respondent to be “kind of touchy ,” but she “never thought much 
of it.”  32 114. At hearing, r espondent admitted he sometimes playfully bumped 
shoulders with students. H e would usually pretend to be hurt even though the contact 
was light, minimal, and friendly. Additionally, he would sometimes poke students who 
were not paying attention in class. As he put it, he is a large man who does not move 
quietly, so if he could ge t close enough to student s to poke their arm s, that was proof 
they were not paying enough attention to his class.  
115. HT and YK credibly testified that respondent made physical contact with 
students on multiple occasions. Respondent credibly testified that such contact was 
friendly and good-natured.  
STUDENTS MT,  MM,  AH,  BT, DN,  AND DE – ALLEGATIONS OF FOUL 
LANGUAGE  
116. Complainant alleged, “During the 2021-2022 school year, Students MT, 
MM, AH, BT, DN, and DE heard Respondent curse in class, at least once a day, saying 
‘damn,’ ‘shit, ’ ‘ass,’ and ‘fuck.’”  Complainant further alleged that during his interview 
with Ms. Alvarado, respondent admitted to saying “damn” in his class.  
117. MT, AH,  DN, and DE  did not testify at hearing. BT testified that 
respondent sa id “shit, fuck, damn, and ass” in class. BT also heard respondent say 
“asshole”  in passing, though not in class. BT estimated respondent said one of more of 
those words “every other class.” He never swore at students, but rather used profanity 
in a “playful” way. For example, he often cursed when somet hing went wrong with a 
school computer.  
118. MM testified that respondent used profanity in class “from time to time.” 
MM specifically recalled respondent saying “damn” in class , though not often. The 33 profanity did not bother MM, who found it “mild” compared to the language students 
used throughout the school day.  
119. In his interview with Ms. Alvarado, respondent acknowledged saying 
“damn” in class, usually if he got hurt or frustrated. At hearing, he also admitted saying 
“damn” in class, usually about technology. He denied saying “shit,” but conceded he 
might have done so quietly and accidentally. He admitted saying “don’t be an ass” to 
members of the wrestling team. He adamantly denied saying “fuck,” explaining there 
was “no way, no how” he would use that word at school.  
120. MM was credible in his  testimony . BT was credible insofar as they 
testified that respondent used swear words during class . Respondent  was credible and 
acknowledged using some swear words during class. As to the frequency of 
respondent’s swearing, BT ’s estimate was inconsistent with MM  and respondent’s 
respective estimates.  BT estimated respondent swore “every other class.” MM 
disagreed and found it was “not often.” Respondent credibly explained he only  swore 
when faced with a frustrating situation, such as technological difficulties. Similarly, BT 
testified respondent said “fuck,” but MM and respondent disagreed.  
121. Although all three witnesses were generally credible, where they 
disagreed about the frequency of respondent’s swearing or whether he said “fuck,” 
MM and respondent were more credible tha n BT. BT appeared to take their  testimony 
less seriously than MM and respondent. At hearing, BT laughed often and used 
gestures such as shrugging their shoulders to suggest they could not clearly remember at times.  In contrast, MM and respondent were straightforward and serious 
when testifying. As a result, based on their d emeanors while testifying and the 
specificity of their recollections, MM and respondent were more credible than BT as to 
the frequency of respondent’s swearing and the specific words he used.  34 Respondent’s Additional Evidence  
122. Since August 2024, r espondent has worked  at the Sacramento Academic 
and Vocational Academy  (SAVA) , a charter school.  His students range from 12 years 
old to 19 years old. He teaches students enrolled in independent study as well as live 
classes in math and ELA. He also helps students with their questions in any subject.  
123. Respondent has been a teacher for 25 years. He was the eighth of nine 
children raised by a single mother in the South Natomas area of Sacramento.  His life 
was “turned around” by teachers around him.  After working in criminal restitution for 
nine years, during which time he sought to recover compensation for victims of crime, 
he started to see familiar names in the criminal justice system. He realized he had the 
chance to give back to his community the way the teachers in his youth had given 
back to him , so he quit his job and began pursuing his teaching credential.  
124. At hearing, respondent explained he has “dialed down” his behavior with 
students since starting at SAVA. In hindsight, he does not believe any of his conduct at 
Foothill cross ed any lines of professionalism, but he sees now that he skirted those 
lines too closely.  His goal was to build and maintain strong relationships with his 
students. He used humor as a way of achieving that goal. He believes he mostly succeeded in connecting with his students, and he was shocked and surprised that 
students did not appro ach him directly to express any discomfort he caused them.  He 
cited his yearly performance evaluations, which showed he consistently met or 
exceeded expectations, as proof of his commitment to students and effective teaching 
style.  
125. Now, respondent still attempts to build rapport with his students, but he 
is more sensitive to their feelings, even if they do not vocalize those feelings. For 35 example, he explained he would not discuss Fallon Fox or the issue of transgender 
athletes competing against cisgender opponents today. He reflected that whether 
conduct is appropriate often depends on both the nature of the conduct and the line 
of what is considered professional. He acknowledged that he was perhaps too slow in 
recognizing how the line of professionalism has shifted over the past 25 years.  He is 
deeply invested in his role as a teacher and has changed his approach to  ensure  his 
students do not feel mistreated.  
CHARACTER EVIDENCE  
126. Respondent called nine character witnesses at hearing, eight  of whom  
also wrote letters in support.  Six of the witnesses are  respondent’s former students  
and three  are former coworkers . The students uniformly praised respondent for his 
deep commitment to his students’ success, not only in class but in life.  Collectively, 
they described him with phrases like, “ he is a model of professionalism and kindness,” 
“his style of teaching is like no other,” “he also was always there when anyone had a 
problem and just  needed someone to talk to,” “ he takes great pride in helping all 
students and encourages the excitement to learn ,” “he was specifically known in the 
community to be a free tutor and mentor ,” and “[respondent] went above and beyond 
the call of duty as a teacher in his early teaching years and continues to do so to this 
day.” 
127. In particular, Moises Espejo, a former  student , credits  respondent’s 
mentorship with his current professional success. M r. Espejo was in respondent’s 
eight h-grade ELA class  in 2009. In his letter, he wrote of his life at the time:  
I had 2 sisters die within the last 3 years prior to attending 
this school, was living in poverty, and had an abusive 36 household. I was also morbidly obese during these years. I 
had no father figure, no guidance, and was on paper a 
perfect statistic to either end up in the justice system or to 
fall into a category of underserved individuals. I could have 
fallen into drugs,  alcohol, crime, gangs, or ETC. I did not. My 
8th grade year I was placed in [respondent’s]  English writing 
and composition class. That is where the start of my 
mentorship and education from [respondent]  began.  
128. Mr. Espejo praised respondent not only for helping him earn good 
grades in all his classes and join the honor roll, but also with providing “ guidance on 
how to be accountable as an individual, solve personal conflicts like a mature adult, and ke [eping]  me from  being a felon and acting on my emotions. ” Respondent 
continued to tutor and mentor Mr. Espejo through high school even though he was no 
longer Mr. Espejo’s teacher. About his time in high school, Mr. Espejo wrote:  
My homelife was extremely unstable, my parents were 
fighting, and my health was atrocious to say the least. I still 
did not have a father figure. [Respondent]  still assisted me 
in my education when I was struggling in my English and 
mathematics classes. He tutored me in exchange for signing 
community service hours for my JROTC  [Junior Reserve 
Officer Training Corps] program in which I became an 
officer, leader, and battalion medic. I would have never been on the honor roll all 4 years of highschool [
sic] 
without [respondent] . I would have not learned from my 
mistakes as a growing child had it not been for 37 [respondent] . I would have not been successful without 
[respondent] , undoubtedly.  
129. Today, Mr. Espejo is a paramedic. He has been singled out as “the best 
prehospital report writer” for every employer he has had, and he believes he owes his 
success to respondent’s mentorship. He noted, “I would not have been as successful in 
any facet of my career without [respondent].”  
130. Respondent’s former coworkers similarly praised his dedication to his 
students and sense of responsibility for their wellbeing and education.  Fred 
Goodmand and Manny Suvankham both worked with respondent for several years 
when they were public safety officers at a high school where respondent worked prior 
to Oakdale. They both observed respondent interact with students . Neither ever saw or 
heard of  respondent  behaving disrespectfully or unprofessionally.  
131. Anjelica Mendoza was the Vice Principal at Oakdale when respondent 
worked there. During that time, she “ consistently witnessed his unwavering dedication 
to his students, their parents, and the Oakdale community. ” Ms. Mendoza is aware of 
the Accusation and “ can vouch that he never exhibited any such behavior during his 
time at Oakdale Elementary. On the contrary, he conducted himself professionally and 
responsibly at all times. ” 
Summar y of Respondent’s Conduct  and Analysis of Morrison  Factors 
132. As discussed above, complainant  established that respondent engaged in 
much of the conduct alleged in the Accusation. Specifically, complainant proved, 
through  clear and convincing evidence, that respondent: (1) teased HT about her arms, 
hands, and forehead using GoGuardian; (2) hugged HT and said,  “we missed you so 
much. Class isn’t the same without you ,” when she returned after an absence; (3) 38 jokingly asked HT , “Do I need to beat someone’s ass?” when she was upset with a 
substitute teacher; (4) said to HT , “you have three holes. Don’t be weird,” after she 
stated in class, “I have three holes”; (5) discussed with student witnessing someone’s 
belly button piercing be ripped out ; (6) called students “sweetheart” or “sweetie,” 
“baby girl,” and “hu n”; (7) told HT her shorts were too short and made other playful 
remarks about her clothing and appearance; (8) asked YJ questions about her assault 
to determine whether he needed to make a mandated report; (9) joked about tripping 
YJ; (10) told students on the wrestling team to “stop being an asshole” and “stop 
dicking around”; (11) told wrestlers they looked “a little chunky” or “a little chub” to 
motivate them to maintain a health y weig ht all season; (12) compared the competitive 
advantage and risk of injury associated with a transgender woman competing in MMA 
to his own wrestling of a 10 -year-old; (13) mistakenly used the wrong pronouns for BT 
and DR and used the wrong first name for DR ; (14) pushed past AF and told her to 
“move” one time; (15) sack tapped an eighth -grade student at Oakdale; (16) playfully 
bumped into students on campus; and (17) occasionally said “damn,” “ass,” and “shit” 
in class in front of students.  
133. However, proving that respondent engaged in the aforementioned 
conduct does not end the inquiry. In Morrison v. State Board of Education  (1969) 1 
Cal.3d 214 (Morrison ), the California Supreme Court concluded a teaching credential 
cannot be disciplined for unprofessional conduct  “unless that conduct indicates that 
the [educator] is unfit to teach.” ( Id. at p. 229.)  In other words, “ [t]he evidence must not 
only be sufficient to support a finding that [respondent]  engaged in misconduct, but 
also a finding that his misconduct met the criteria for unfitness for service as 
articulated in Morrison .” (San Diego Unified School Dist. v. Com . on Professional 
Competence  (2013) 214 Cal.App. 4th 1120, 1149.)  39 134. The Morrison  Court outlined factors to consider when determining 
whether an educator’s conduct demonstrates unfitness to teach ( Morrison, supra , 1 
Cal.3d at p. 229), and the Commission adopted those factors by enacting California 
Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80302 . Those factors are considered below.  
LIKELIHOOD OF ADVERSE EFFECT ON STUDENTS OR FELLOW TEACHERS  
135. “A teacher [. . .] in the public school system is regarded by the public and 
pupils in the light of an exemplar, whose words and actions are likely to be followed 
by the children coming under [ his] care and protection.” ( Bd. of Ed ucation  v. Swan  
(1953), 41 Cal.2d 546, 552, quoting 66 Corpus Juris, p. 55, [overruled on other grounds 
by Bekiaris v. Bd. of Ed ucation  (1972) 6 Cal. 3d 575].) Respondent’s conduct had an 
adverse effect on multiple students, most notably  HT. Moreover, respondent’s  
behavior  portrayed  him and the teaching profession negatively.  
PROXIMITY OF REMOTENESS IN TIME 
136. Respondent’s misconduct mostly  occurred in the 2021-2022 school year, 
which was between approximately 40 and 50  months  ago. Although that is not recent, 
it is not remote in time either. (See, e.g., Brandt v. Fox  (1979) 90 Cal.App.3d 737, 747, 
holding that events 53 months earlier were “relatively remote in time.”)  
TYPE OF CREDENTIALS HELD 
137. Respondent’s Clear Multiple Subject Teaching Credential authorizes him  
to teach students of many ages in a variety of contexts.  Typically, that credential is 
used in a middle or high school setting, where students are  nearing adulthood and 
need good examples of how to behave maturely and appropriately.  Therefore, it is 
even more imperative that he exemplifies  the type of behavior society wants emulated 40 by students. Some of r espondent’s conduct raise s concerns over whether he embodied 
the type of mature behavior a n appropriate role model would display . 
AGGRAVATING AND MITIGATING FACTORS  
138. The Commission’s regulations define “aggravating factor” as “an event or 
circumstance which demonstrates that a greater degree of adverse action for an act of 
professional misconduct is needed to adequately protect the public, schoolchildren or the profess ion.” (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80300, subd. (b).) The definition includes six 
examples:  
(1) a prior record of adverse action including the nature and extent of that record;  
(2) that the misconduct evidences multiple acts of wrongdoing or demonstrate a pattern of misconduct;  
(3) that the misconduct was surrounded by or followed by bad faith, dishonesty or other violation of the laws 
governing educators;  
(4) that the misconduct significantly harmed a child 
entrusted to the care of a credential holder or applicant, 
significantly harmed the public or the educational system;  
(5) that the holder or applicant demonstrated indifference 
toward the consequence of the misconduct, which includes 
failure to comply with known court orders; or  41 (6) that the holder or applicant had prior notice, warnings 
or reprimands for similar conduct from any reliable source.  
139. Notably, just one of these aggravating factors is  present in this case. 
Respondent’s conduct included multiple acts that demonstrated a pattern. Respondent 
has taught for approximately 25 years with no prior employer or credential discipline. 
Respondent’s conduct did not involve bad faith or dishonesty. Although many of the 
students expressed discomfort with respondent’s actions , there was no evidence they  
were significantly harmed. Respondent did not demonstrate indifference to the 
consequences of his acti ons, but rather accepted responsibility and credibly explained 
that he is more vigilant now to maintain appropriate professional boundaries. Finally, 
respondent had no prior warnings or reprimands.  
140. Neither the Education Code nor the regulations adopted by the 
Commission specify what constitutes “extenuating circumstances.” However, the California Code of Regulations defines “mitigating factor” as “an event or circumstance 
which demonstrates that the public, schoolchildren and the profession would be 
adequately protected by a more lenient degree of adverse action or no adverse action 
whatsoever.” (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80300, subd. (m).) The definition includes seven 
examples:  
(1) absence of any prior record of adverse action over many years of educational service, coupled with present 
misconduct which is not deemed most serious;  
(2) lack of harm to the person who is the object of the 
misconduct;  42 (3) emotional or physical difficulties suffered by the holder 
or applicant which substantially contributed to the 
misconduct; provided that the difficulties were not the 
product of illegal conduct by the credential holder or 
applicant, such as illegal drug  or substance abuse; and 
further provided that the credential holder or applicant has 
established through clear and convincing evidence that he or she no longer has such difficulties;  
(4) a demonstration of good character of the applicant or holder attested to by references from the educational community or the general community from individuals aware of the extent of the applicant's or holder's 
misconduct;  
(5) objective action taken by the applicant or holder, spontaneously demonstrating remorse at the time of the 
misconduct, and recognition of the wrongdoing which is 
designed to timely make amends for the consequences of 
the misconduct;  
(6) the proximity or remoteness in time relative to the 
seriousness of the misconduct; or  
(7) the nature and extent of subsequent rehabilitation.  
141. Here, the evidence established the presence of multiple mitigating 
factors. Respondent has no record of prior adverse action, and his present misconduct is not the “most serious” kind of misconduct in which a teacher can engage. None of 43 the students were  significantly harmed. Respondent’s former students and colleagues 
attested to respondent’s good character and dedication to his students . Respondent 
recognized h ow his behavior can improve and is actively monitoring his current 
behavior with students to ensure he does not cross professional boundaries again. 
Since the events in question occurred approximately three to four  years ago, 
respondent has gained new employment at another high school and has not received 
any other complaints about  his behavior . 
PRAISEWORTHINESS OR BLAMEWORTHINESS OF THE MOTIVES RESULTING IN 
THE MISCONDUCT  
142. Although r espondent bears the sole blame for his conduct, he undertook 
many of his actions for the commendable purpose of attempting to create and grow lasting and meaningful relationships with his students. Many of his former students 
confirmed he regularly accomplished that goal.  
LIKELIHOOD OF RECURRENCE  
143. Given respondent’s lack of disciplinary history before or after these 
events, coupled with his sincere efforts to understand how his actions fell short of the 
Commission’s expectations of its teachers and his  attempts to correct his behavior , his 
misconduct is unlikely to recur . His former students and colleagues  supported that 
conclusion as well . 
POSSIBLE CHILLING EFFECT ON CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS OF OTHERS  
144. Neither party presented evidence about the possibility of a chilling effect 
on any person’s constitutional rights. Given the nature of respondent’s conduct, such 
an effect is unlikely.  44 PUBLICITY OR NOTORIETY OF MISCONDUCT  
145. There was no evidence that respondent’s conduct during the 2021-2022 
school year  was noteworthy or the subject of public interest.  
LEGAL CONCLUSIONS  
1. Complainant bears the burden of proving the existence of grounds for 
disciplining respondent’s Credentials an d must do so by clear and convincing evidence 
to a reasonable certainty. ( Daniels v. Dept. of Motor Vehicles  (1983) 33 Cal.3d 532, 536 
[“When an administrative agency initiates an action to suspend or revoke a license, the 
burden of proving the facts necessary to support the action rests with the agency 
making the allegation”]; Gardener v. Comm’n.  on Professional Competence  (1985) 164 
Cal.App.3d 1036 , 1039 -1040 [recognizing that the clear and convincing evidence 
standard applies to proceedings to discipline a teacher’s credential, whereas the lesser preponderance of the evidence standard applies to proceedings to dismiss a teacher 
from particular empl oyment].) “The courts have defined clear and convincing evidence 
as evidence which is so clear as to leave no substantial doubt and as sufficiently strong 
to command the unhesitating assent of every reasonable mind. [Citations.] It has been 
said that a pre ponderance calls for probability, while clear and convincing proof 
demands a high probability [citations].” (
In re Terry D . (1978) 83 Cal.App.3d 890, 899; 
italics original. ) 
2. In a disciplinary action such as this, respondent must prove rehabilitation. 
(Whetstone v. Bd. of Dental Exam’rs  (1927) 87 Cal.App. 156, 164; Evid. Code, § 500.) 
The burden of proof is a preponderance of the evidence (Evid. Code, § 115), which 45 means “more likely than not.” ( Sandoval v. Bank of America  (2002) 94 Cal.App.4th 
1378, 1388.)  
Causes for Discipline  
UNPROFESSIONAL CONDUCT  
3. The Commission may discipline a credential based on the holder’s 
unprofessional conduct. (Ed. Code, § 44421.) Conduct is unprofessional if it “ violates 
the rules or ethical code of a profession or [is] such conduct which is unbecoming a 
member of a profession in good standing .” (Bd. of Ed ucation  v. Swan , supra,  41 Cal.2d 
at p. 553; quoting, 66 Corpus Juris, p. 55.)  
4. As discussed above, complainant proved by clear and convincing 
evidence that respondent : (1) teased HT about her arms, hands, and forehead using 
GoGuardian; (2) jokingly asked HT , “Do I need to beat someone’s ass?” when she was 
upset with a substitute teacher; ( 3) told students on the wrestling team to “stop being 
an asshole” and “stop dicking around”; ( 4) sack tapped an eighth -grade student at 
Oakdale; a nd (5) occasionally said “damn,”  “ass,” and “shit” in class in front of students . 
Such conduct was unprofessional because it violated the rules or ethical code of the 
teaching profession and was unbecoming of a teacher in good standing. ( Bd. of 
Education  v. Swan , supra,  41 Cal.2d at p.  553; quoting, 66 Corpus Juris, p. 55 .) Cause 
therefore exists to discipline respondent’s C redentials for unprofessional conduct 
pursuant to Education Code section 44421.  
5. Regarding the balance of the allegations against  respondent,  
complainant either did not prove them by clear and convincing evidence  or did not 
prove that they constituted unprofessional conduct.  46 EVIDENT UNFITNESS FOR SERVICE  
6. The Commission may discipline a credential based on the holder’s 
evident unfitness for service. (Ed. Code, § 44421.) “Evident unfitness for service” means 
a teacher is clearly not fit, not adapted to or unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by 
reason of temp eramental defects or inadequacies. ( Woodland Joint Unified School 
Dist. v. Com on Professional Competence  (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444.) “Unlike 
‘unprofessional conduct,’ ‘evident unfitness for service’ connotes a fixed character trait, presumably not remediable merely on receipt of notice that one’s conduct fails to 
meet the expectations of the employing school district.” (
Ibid.) 
7. Complainant did not prove by clear and convincing evidence that 
respondent is not fit for service as a teacher  due to temperamental defects or a fixed 
character trait. Cause therefore does not exist to discipline his C redentials for evident 
unfitness for services pursuant to Education Code section 44421.  
IMMORAL CONDUCT  
8. The Commission may discipline a credential based on the holder’s 
immoral conduct. (Ed. Code, § 44421.) The term “immoral” has been defined generally as “that which is hostile to the welfare of the general public and contrary to good morals. . . . [It] incl udes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, 
indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; or as willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct 
showing moral indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the community, 
and as an inconsid erate attitude toward good order and the public welfare.” (
Bd. of 
Education  of San Francisco Unified School Dist. v. Weiland  (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 
811.)  47 9. Complainant did not prove by clear and convincing evidence that 
respondent engaged in immoral conduct. Cause therefore does not exist to discipline 
his Credentials for immoral conduct pursuant to Education Code section 44421.  
ACTS INVOLVING MORAL TURPITUDE  
10. The Commission may discipline a credential “for any cause that would 
have warranted the denial of an application for a credential or the renewal thereof.” 
(Ed. Code, § 44421.) An application for a credential may be denied if the applicant “has 
committed an y act involving moral turpitude.” (Ed. Code, § 44345, subd. (e).) “Moral 
turpitude” has been defined as “everything done contrary to justice, honesty, modesty 
or good morals.” ( Rice v. Alcoholic Beverage Appeals Bd . (1979) 89 Cal.App.3d 30, 36.) 
An act inv olves moral turpitude if it involves a serious breach of a duty owed to 
another or to society. ( In re Stuart K. Lesansky  (2001) 25 Cal.4th 11, 16.)  
11. Complainant did not prove by clear and convincing evidence that 
respondent engaged in acts involving moral turpitude. Cause therefore does not exist 
to discipline his Credentials for acts involving moral turpitude pursuant to Education 
Code sections 44421 and 44345, subdivision (e) . 
Appropriate Discipline Based on Morrison  Factors 
12. Complainant proved there is cause to discipline respondent’s Credentials 
for unprofessional conduct. Such discipline may consist of a private admonition, public 
reproval, or the suspension or revocation of the Credentials. (Ed. Code, §§ 44000.5; 
44421.) Wh en determining what level of discipline to impose, the Commission should 
consider the aggravating and mitigating factors previously identified. (Cal. Code Regs., 
tit. 5, § 80300, subds. (b), (m).)  48 13. As discussed above, many of the mitigating factors —and just one of the 
aggravating factors —are present. Consequently, suspending or revoking respondent’s 
credentials is unwarranted and would be unduly punitive. The purpose of an 
administrative disciplinary  action is not to punish the licensee for his misconduct, but 
rather to ensure he does not exercise his license privileges in derogation of the public 
interest. ( Camacho v. Youde  (1979) 95 Cal. App. 3d 161, 164.)  
14. Instead, the appropriate discipline is to publicly reprove respondent. 
Such public reproval serves the interests of public protection because it will constitute an “adverse action” and thus can be considered as prior discipline in the event 
respondent enga ges in future misconduct. Furthermore, a public reproval balances the 
Commission’s interest in regulating its licensees with consideration of the significant mitigating factors present here.  
Respondent’s Affirmative Defenses  
15. Respondent raised three affirmative defenses in his Notice of Defense.  
He objected to the form of the Accusation as indefinite and uncertain. Similarly, he objected that the Accusation does not state acts upon which the Commission can proceed. Those defenses are rejected. The Accusation clearly identified the alleged 
miscondu ct and the legal grounds purportedly justifying discipline against 
respondent’s Credentials.  
16. Respondent also objected that the Accusation alleged acts older than 
four years, in violation of Education Code section 44242.7. Subdivision (a) of that 
section provides:  
Any allegation of an act or omission by the holder of a 
credential, except for an allegation that involves sexual 49 misconduct with a minor or recurring conduct resulting in a 
pattern of misconduct, shall be presented to the Committee 
of Credentials for initial review within four years from the 
date of the alleged act or omission, or within one year from 
the date the ac t or omission should reasonably have been 
discovered . 
17. ”For purposes of Education Code section 44242.7(a), a matter is 
presented to the Committee when the credential holder or applicant is notified that 
the matter is set for initial review by the Committee .” (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80306, 
subd. (b).) Here, the parties did not submit direct evidence of the date respondent was 
notified the Committee had set the matter for initial review. However, complainant 
alleged in the Accusation that the Committee determined probable cause existed for 
an adverse action against respondent in October 2024.  Consequently, even if viewed in 
the light most favorable to respondent, allegations from October  2020 through 
October  2024 would be timely included. All but one of the allegations in the 
Accusation are from the 2021- 2022 school year and are therefore validly included. The 
sole exception is the allegation that respondent “sac k tapped” a student while he 
worked at Oakdale.  
18. Respondent worked at Oakdale until mid- 2021. Therefore, he worked at 
Oakdale for several months  within the four -year period predating October  2024. 
Respondent had the burden of proving the facts underlying his affirmative defenses. 
Respondent did not prove any of the allegations occurred more than four years before 
September 11, 2024. Therefore, his affirmative defense based on Education Code 
section 44242.7 is rejected.  50 ORDER  
Respondent Mario Lorenzo Machado’s  Clear Single Subject Teaching Credential  
and Clear Crosscultural, Language, and Academic Certificat e are PUBLICLY REPROVED 
for unprofessional conduct, pursuant to Education Code section 44421 . 
 
DATE:  October 28, 2025  
SEAN GAVIN  
Administrative Law Judge  
Office of Administrative Hearings
 
