BEFORE THE  
COMMISSION ON TEACH ER CREDENTIALING  
STATE OF CALIFORNIA  
In the Matter of the Accusation  Against:  
ALEXANDROS ROBERT ACEDO, Respondent  
Agency Case No. 2 -516516716  
OAH No. 2025040775  
PROPOSED DECISION  
Christopher W. Dietrich, Administrative Law Judge  (ALJ) , Office of Administrative 
Hearings (OAH), State of California, heard this matter on  September 16, 2025, by 
videoconference from Sacramento, California.  
Stephanie Alamo -Latif, Deputy Attorney General, represented complainant Mary 
Vixie Sandy, Ed.D., Executive Director of the California Commission on Teacher 
Credentialing (Commission).  
Joshua Richtel, Attorney at Law, represented respondent Alexandros  Robert 
Acedo , who was present.  
Evidence was received, the record closed, and the matter submitted for decision 
on September 16, 2025.  2 FACTUAL FINDINGS  
Jurisdictional Matters  
1. On May 26, 2015 , the Commission issued a Clear Single Subject Teaching 
Credential (Credential) to respondent. The Credential will expire on June 1, 2030, 
unless renewed. The Commission previously issued a Preliminary Five -Year Single 
Subject Teaching Credential to respondent on January 4, 20 13, which expired on 
February 1, 2018. The Commission previously issued Emergency 30 -Day Substitute 
Teaching Permits to respondent as follows: (1) August 23, 2006, which expired on 
September 1, 2007; (2) December 5, 2008, which expired on July 1, 2010; (3) July 26, 
2010, which expired on August 1, 2011;  and (4) October 13, 2011,  which expired on 
November 1, 2012.  
2. On January 24, 2025, complainant, acting solely in her official capacity, 
signed and thereafter filed an Accusation against respondent’s Credential . 
Complainant seeks to revoke all credentials, certificates, and authorizations  issued to 
respondent  based upon unprofessional conduct, immoral conduct, acts of moral 
turpitude, and evident unfitness for service. Specifically, the Accusation alleges  that 
respondent was convicted of driving under the influence of alcohol (DUI)  on January 6, 
2023.  
3. Respondent timely filed a Notice of Defense to the Accusation . The 
matter was set for an evidentiary hearing before an ALJ of the OAH, an independent 
adjudicative agency of the State of California, pursuant to Government Code section 
11500 et seq.  3 January 6, 2023 Conviction  
4. On January 6, 2023, in the Superior Court of California, County of Fresno, 
Case No. M 22912025, respondent was convicted by plea of nolo contendere of 
violating Vehicle  Code section 23152, subdivision (b), DUI with a blood alcohol content 
(BAC) of 0.08 percent or higher, a misdemeanor. Respondent was sentenced to 180 
days in jail, with 176 days stayed, and three years of probation. He was approved to 
serve his jail sentence through an adult offender work program . He was ordered to 
complete a level 1 DUI prog ram and a 12- week parenting class . He was further 
ordered to pay fees and fines.  
5. The circumstances underlying this conviction occurred on September 21, 
2022. Officers of the City of Fresno Police Department  (Fresno PD)  were dispatched in 
response  to reports that  an intoxicated mal e had driven  a motor vehicle with children 
inside. Upon arriv al, the officers contacted respondent , who admi tted to driving after  
consuming two beers. Respondent’s children, ages four and eight, were in the car . 
Respondent  failed to adequately perform field sobriety tests . He submitted a 
breath sample for a preliminary alcohol screening test , which resulted  in a BAC of 0.19 
percent . An officer arrested respondent for DUI. After his arrest, respondent initially 
consented to a blood draw. However, before the blood draw was administered respondent screamed , “You  better not get that needle close to me, I’ll fuck you up!”  at 
an officer  and a phlebotomist. When the officer asked respondent  if he wanted to 
complete a breath test instead he responded, “F uck you!” When respondent was asked 
if he wanted to complete a blood test he responded, “Fuck you! If you get that needle close to me, I’ll kick you right in the balls!” The officer obtained a search warrant for 
respondent’s blood. Respondent then cooperated with the blood draw without being 
restrained.  He told the officer he was afraid of needles.  4 Respondent’s Evidence  
RESPONDENT ’S TESTIMONY  
6. Respondent is 42 years old and lives in Fresno, California. He has been a 
teacher for the Fresno Unified School District  (Fresno USD)  for 12 years.  His children 
are students in the Fresno USD. He has taught seventh  grade world history at Tenaya 
Middle School (Tenaya) since January 2024. He taught at the School of Unlimited 
Learning (SOUL), a high school in the Fresno USD , at the time of his DUI arrest and 
conviction. He resigned his position at SOUL  at the conclusion of the 2022-2023 
school  year. 
7. Respondent consumed alcohol prior to picking up his  children from their 
gymnastics lesson  in Fresno on September 21, 2022. He did not recall how much 
alcohol he drank  before his arrest. He explained  that he consumed alcohol after he 
ended his teaching day because he had an argument with his wife . He acknowledged 
that he swore and threatened officers after his arrest. H is fear of needles caused him to 
act impulsively when his blood was about to be drawn. He regrets his conduct.  
8. Respondent was arrested and convicted of DUI in 2011. Respondent 
accepted that he is an alcoholic after his September 2022 DUI arrest. He previously 
resisted being labeled an alcoholic, but  accepted it after he drove while intoxicated 
with his children in the car. He realizes  that his alcoholism is a disease and there is no 
amount of alcohol that he can drink safely.  
9. Respondent completed a three -month outpatient recovery program with 
My Time Recovery in January 2023. He has attended Alcoholics  Anonymous (AA) off 
and on for years. He began attending AA two to three times per week in January 2023. 
He provided sign -in sheets showing his AA atte ndance between July 6, 2024, and June 5 11, 2025. Respondent has had multiple AA sponsors. He is working through AA step 
one with his current sponsor but has previously completed AA steps one  through four 
with a prior sponsor.  He explained that AA’s practice is for participants to restart the 
steps if they  start working with a new sponsor. Respondent participates in a running 
group  with other AA attendees, attends church, and makes music to support his 
sobriety. His friends and family are supportive of his sobriety.  
10. According to a report from the Fresno PD, officers were dispatched to 
respondent’s residence on November 9, 2024,  in response to calls regarding a 
domestic disturbance. Upon  making contact with respondent, t he responding officers 
noticed a strong odor of alcohol emitting from respondent’s body.  Respondent told 
the officers that he consumed alcohol before they arrived. At hearing, r espondent 
denied consuming alcohol on this date . 
11. Respondent has been sober from alcohol since  December 25, 2024. He 
testified that he previously  was sober between October 2 or 3, 2022 , and December 23, 
2024 . Respondent  consumed alcohol on December 24, 2024, after  his wife made 
inappropriate  comments to their children  about things he  did when he was younger. 
He has since  separated from his wife.  
12. Respondent realized that his coping strategies were insufficient after his 
December 24, 2024 relapse. He  began seeing a therapist in January 2025.  His therapist 
has helped him identify what triggers his alcohol consumption. Respondent identified 
marital conflicts and “ having too much time  on his hands ” as his triggers. He is 
working with  his therapist to develop coping strategies to avoid future relapses.  6 13. Respondent served his  adult work program  sentence. He completed a  
parenting class  and DUI program  as the court required . He has paid all fees and fines. 
He has fully complied with his probation.  
RYAN DUFF’S TESTIMONY  
14. Ryan Duff is the Principal at Tenaya . He has held this position for four 
years and has worked in the Fresno USD  for 28 years.  
15. Respondent has worked as a seventh -grade  social studies teacher at 
Tenaya since January 2024. Mr. Duff hired respondent to take over teaching social 
studies midway through the school year after another teacher resigned . Mr. Duff 
closely observed respondent’s teaching after he was hired. Respondent is consistently 
on time and prepared. He interacts well with his students and other teachers in his 
department. Mr. Duff has no concerns about respondent’s teaching abilities.  
16. Mr. Duff learned of respondent’s DUI conviction approximately two 
months after he was hired.  Mr. Duff was not aware before hearing  that respondent 
swore at and threatened officers. Mr. Duff found this information shocking because it 
is inconsistent with the conduct he typically observes from respondent. Further, he was not aware that respondent’s children were in his car at the time of his DUI arrest.  
Analysis  
17. Clear and convincing evidence established that respondent was 
convicted of DUI on January 6, 2023 . In Morrison v. State Board of Education  (1969) 1 
Cal.3d 214, the California Supreme Court concluded a teaching credential cannot be disciplined for immoral  conduct, unprofessional conduct , or conduct involving moral 
turpitude  “unless that conduct indicates that the [educator] is unfit to teach.” (
Id. at p. 7 229.) The Court outlined factors to consider when determining whether an educator’s 
conduct demonstrates unfitness to teach, and the Commission adopted those factors 
by enacting California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80302. Those factors are 
cons idered below.  
LIKELIHOOD OF ADVERSE EFFECTS ON STUDENTS OR FELLOW TEACHERS  
18. In assessing th is factor, it is not necessary to find that a respondent’s 
conduct caused actual harm . Rather , it is  the likelihood that  the conduct may impact 
students and fellow teachers  that is to be analyzed . (See Broney v. California Com. on 
Teacher Credentialing  (2010) 184 Cal.App.4th 462, 477.) No evidence of actual  or likely  
adverse effects on any student or teacher was presented.  
PROXIMITY OR REMOTENESS IN TIME 
19. Respondent’s conviction occurred two and a half years ago , in January 
2023. Th is is proximate in tim e as respondent remains on probation from  his 
conviction until January 2026.  
TYPE OF CREDENTIAL HELD 
20. Respondent’s Clear Single Subject Credential allows him to teach 
students from preschool through twelfth grade . (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80004, subd. 
(a).) With his C redential, respondent may interact with students of all ages. It is 
therefore imperative that he engage in prof essional conduct and model appropriate 
behavior to all students . 8 EXTENUATING OR AGGRAVATING CIRCUMSTANCES  
21. Neither the Education Code nor the applicable regulations specify what 
constitutes “extenuating circumstances.” However, California Code of Regulations, title 
5, section 80300, subdivision (m), defines “mitigating factor” as “an event or 
circumstance which  demonstrates that the public, school children and the profession 
would be adequately protected by a more lenient degree of adverse action or no 
adverse action whatsoever.”  
22. California Code of Regulations, title 5, section 80300, subdivision (b), lists 
aggravating factors, the presence of which indicate a greater degree of discipline is necessary to protect students and the teaching profession. These factors include, in 
pertin ent part, whether: (1) the misconduct evidences multiple acts of wrongdoing or 
demonstrate a pattern of misconduct;  (2) the misconduct was surrounded by or 
followed by bad faith, dishonesty or other violation of the laws governing educators;  
(3) that the m isconduct significantly harmed a child entrusted to the care of a 
credential holder or applicant, significantly harmed the public or the educational 
system .  
23. Respondent ’s DUI created a significant risk of harm to himself, the public, 
and his children. He was previously convicted of the same offense in 2011 . In 
mitigation , he has acknowledged that he is an alcoholic and that he cannot safely 
consume any amount of alcohol.  Respondent has chosen to become sober and has 
engaged in several recovery programs to support his sobriety. However, he relapsed 
by consuming  alcohol at least twice since  his initial October 2022 sobriety date  on 
November 9, 2024 , and December 2 4, 2024.  Respondent admitte d to Fresno PD 
officers that he consumed alcohol on November 9, 2024. This admission is consistent 
with the officers’ observations that the odor of alcohol was emitting from respondent’s 9 body. Respondent’s contradictory testimony denying his alcohol consumption on 
November 9, 2024, is not credible.  
PRAISEWORTHINESS OR BLAMEWORTHINESS OF MOTIVES RESULTING IN THE 
MISCONDUCT  
24. Respondent  is solely responsible for his decision to drive with his 
children in the car after consuming alcohol. His dangerous and unlawful conduct is 
blameworthy.  
LIKELIHOOD OF RECURRENCE  
25. Respondent  is engaging in AA, individual counseling, and other measures 
to support his sobriety . However, his recovery is new and fragil e. He has relapsed twice 
since he first pursued sobriety after his arrest.  Until respondent attains consistent 
long-term  sobriety, a  recurrence of future misconduct involving alcohol is likely . 
ADVERSE IMPACT OR CHILLING EFFECT  
26. Neither party presented evidence about a possible chilling effect on any 
person’s constitutional rights. Considering the nature of respondent’s conviction, such 
an effect is unlikely.  
PUBLICITY OR NOTORIETY OF MISCONDUCT  
27. No evidence was presented that respondent’s conduct was either 
publicized or notorious.  There is no  evidence that anyone  affiliated with the Fresno 
USD, other than Mr. Duff and respondent’s children, are  aware of respondent’s 
conduct or conviction.  10 APPROPRIATE DISCIPLINE  
28. Complainant proved there is cause to discipline respondent’s C redential 
for unprofessional conduct, immoral conduct, and acts of moral turpitude. The 
Commission may “privately admonish, publicly reprove, revoke or suspend” 
respondent’s Credential. (Ed. Code, § 44421.) The Commission must consider the 
aggravating and mitigating factors set forth above in determining the appropriate 
discipline. (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, §  80300, subds. (b), (m).)  
29. Respondent demonstrated an extreme lapse in judgment by driving his 
children af ter consuming alcohol with a BAC of 0.19 percent.  Although this misconduct 
is serious, it did not impact any  students or teachers . However, d iscipline need  not be 
withheld until respondent’s alcohol abuse negatively impacts his teaching. (See In re 
Kelley (1990) 52 Cal.3d 487, 496; Griffiths v. Super. Ct. (2002) 96 Cal.App.4th 757, 772.) 
Such a requirement “overlooks the preventative functions of license discipline, whose 
main purpose is protection of the public.” ( Ibid.) Respondent  has engaged in 
meaningful efforts to address his alcoholism  since his arrest . However, h e relapsed at 
least twice after his initial attempts at sobriety . Respondent must continue to engage 
in programs to support his sobriety to  assure  the Commission he is unlikely to misuse 
alcohol in the future . 
30. The objective of an administrative licensing proceeding is to protect the 
public. Such proceedings are not for the primary purpose of punishment. (See Fahmy 
v. Medical Bd. of Cal.  (1995) 38 Cal.App.4th 810, 817.) Considering all the evidence, 
revoking respondent’s Credential would be unduly punitive. Rather, the appropriate 
discipline is suspending respondent’s Credential for two years, staying the suspension, 
and placing the Credential on probation for a period of five years. The Commission 
may issue a sta yed suspension “for a specified period of time only if the stay and 11 performance of specified rehabilitative or probationary duties by the credential holder 
during the period of the stay is deemed consistent with the purposes of professional 
discipline.” (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 5, § 80300, subd. (t)(1).)  
31. Respondent will be placed on probationary terms to support his sobriety 
and protect the public.  He will be required to abstain from alcohol and controlled 
substances and to submit to biological fluid testing to verify his ongoing sobriety. 
Further, he will be required to attend addiction recovery groups and individual 
counseling and provide documentation of the same to the Commission . A five-year 
term of probation is appropriate considering the severity of respondent’s misconduct 
and his recent relapse following a two -year period of sobriety.  
LEGAL CONCLUSIONS  
Burden and Standard of Proof  
1. Complainant has the burden of proving the allegations in the Accusation 
by clear and convincing evidence to a reasonable certainty. ( Gardner v. Comm. on 
Professional Competence (1985) 164 Cal.App.3d 1035 , 1038 -39.) Clear and convincing 
evidence is evidence that leaves “no substantial doubt” and is “sufficiently strong to 
command the unhesitating assent of every reasonable mind.” ( In re Marriage of 
Weaver  (1990) 224 Cal.App.3d 478, 487, quoting Sheehan v. Sullivan  (1899) 126 Cal. 
189, 193.)  
Applicable Law  
2. Pursuant to the Education Code, commencing with section 44000, and 
California Code of Regulations, title 5, commencing with section 80000, the 12 Commission is responsible for credentialing teachers in public schools in California, 
including issuing credentials and taking adverse action against applicants and 
credential holders.  
3. Education Code section 44421 provides:  
The Commission on Teacher Credentialing shall privately 
admonish, publicly reprove, revoke or suspend for immoral 
or unprofessional conduct, or for persistent defiance of, and refusal to obey, the laws regulating the duties of persons 
serving in the public school system, or for any cause that 
would have warranted the denial of an application for a 
credential or the renewal thereof, or for evident unfitness 
for service.  
4. “Unprofessional conduct” includes “‘that which violates the rules of 
ethical code of a profession or such conduct which is unbecoming a member of a 
profession in good standing.’” (
Bd. of Education of the City of Los Angeles v. Swan  
(1953) 41 Cal.2d 546, 553; quoting, 66 Corpus Juris, p. 55.)  
5. Immoral conduct has been defined generally as that which is hostile to 
the welfare of the general public and contrary to good morals. ( Bd. of Education v. 
Weiland  (1960) 179 Cal.App.2d 808, 811.) “Immorality has not been confined to sexual 
matters, but includes conduct inconsistent with rectitude, or indicative of corruption, 
indecency, depravity, dissoluteness; or as willful, flagrant, or shameless conduct 
showing  moral indifference to the opinions of respectable members of the community, 
and as an inconsi derate attitude toward good order and the public welfare.” ( Ibid.) 
6. Education Code section 44345,  provides in part:  13 The commission may deny any application for the issuance 
of a credential or for the renewal of a credential made by 
any applicant who falls under any of the following 
categories:  
[¶] . . . [¶]  
(e) Has committed any act involving moral turpitude.  
7. “Moral turpitude” has been defined as “everything done contrary to 
justice, honesty, modesty or good morals.” ( Rice v. Alcoholic Beverage Appeals Bd . 
(1979) 89 Cal.App.3d 30, 36.) Further, an  act involves moral turpitude if it involves a 
serious breach of a duty owed to another or to society. ( In re Stuart K. Lesansky  (2001) 
25 Cal.4th 11, 16.)  
8. Evident unfitness for service “means clearly not fit, not adapted to or 
unsuitable for teaching, ordinarily by reason of temperamental defects or 
inadequacies.” ( Woodland Joint  Unified School Dist. v. Comm. on Prof. Competence 
(1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1429, 1444.)  “Unlike ‘unprofessional conduct’, ‘evident unfitness 
for service’ connotes a fixed character trait, presumably not remediable merely on 
receipt of notice that one’s conduct fails to meet the expectations of the employing school district.” (
Ibid.) 
Causes for Discipline  
UNPROFESSIONAL AND IMMORAL CONDUCT  
9. Complainant established by c lear and convincing evidence that 
respondent  engaged in unprofessional and immoral conduct when he drove his 
vehicle with a BAC of 0.1 9 percent while his children were with him, which resulted in a 14 conviction for  DUI. Therefore, complainant established cause to  discipline  respondent’s 
Credential  under Education Code section 44421 for both unprofessional and immoral 
conduct . 
ACTS OF MORAL TURPITUDE  
10. Complainant established by c lear and convincing evidence that 
respondent engaged in an act of moral turpitude when he drove his vehicle with a BAC 
of 0.1 9 percent. His conduct is contrary to good morals  and constitutes  a serious 
breach of the duties he owes  to the public. Therefore, complainant established cause 
to discipline  respondent’s credential  under Education Code section s 44421 and 44345, 
subdivision (e), for moral turpitude . 
EVIDENT UNFITNESS FOR SERVICE  
11. Complainant did not prove  by clear and convincing evidence that  
respondent is evidently unfit for service as a teacher. Specifically, complainant did not prove that respondent is unsuitable for teaching based on a temperamental defect, inadequacy, or irremediable fixed character trait. Therefore, complainant did not 
establish that cause exists to discipline respondent’s credentials for evident unfitness 
for service pursuant to Education Code section 44421.  
Conclusion  
12. Considering all the evidence , suspending respondent’s Credential for two 
years, stayed, and imposing a probationary period of five years is consistent with the 
public health, safety, and welfare.  15 ORDER  
The Clear Single Subject Teaching Credential issued to  respondent Alexandro s 
Robert Acedo is suspended for two years. However, the suspension is stayed,  and 
respondent’s Credential is placed on probation for five years on the following terms 
and conditions.  
SEVERABILITY CLAUSE: Each condition of probation contained herein is a 
separate and distinct condition. If any condition of probation is declared unenforceable in whole, in part, or to any extent, the remaining conditions of 
probation, and each of them, sh all not be affected. Each condition of probation shall 
separately be valid and enforceable to the fullest extent permitted by law.  
1. NEW CREDENTIALS SUBJECT TO ORDER: Any new credential issued by 
the Commission to respondent during the period of probation shall be subject to the same terms and conditions of probation, as set forth herein.  
2. OBEY ALL LAWS: Respondent shall obey all federal, state, and local laws 
and regulations, including, but not limited to, the statutes and regulations of the Commission.  Except for minor traffic infractions, within 72 hours of any incident 
resulting in respondent’s arrest, the filing of any criminal charges, or citation issued, 
respondent shall submit a full and detailed description of the incident to the 
Commission. For purposes of this condition, a “minor traffic infraction” includes only 
traffic violations  which are punishable by a maximum of $400, and do not subject the 
offender to incarceration or probation.  16 3. COMPLIANCE WITH PROBATION: Respondent shall fully comply with the 
terms and conditions of this order and cooperate with representatives of the 
Commission in its monitoring and investigati ng his compliance.  
4. COOPERATION WITH COMMISSION: During the period of probation, 
respondent shall be available for interviews with the Commission in person or by 
telephone upon reasonable notice.  
5. MAINTAIN CURRENT CONTACT INFORMATION: Within seven days of the 
effective date of this decision and order, respondent shall notify the Commission of his 
current mailing address and phone number where voicemail messages may be left. 
Respondent will notify th e Commission in writing of any change of mailing address , 
residence address, or phone number within 10 days of such change.  
6. NOTIFICATION OF EMPLOYER: Within five days of the effective date of 
this decision and order, respondent shall provide a true and correct copy of this 
decision, together with a true and correct copy of the Accusation in this matter, to his  
employer, if any, and to his  immediate supervisor at that employer. Within five days of 
complying with this notification requirement, respondent shall submit proof of compliance to the Commission.  
If respondent changes employment at any time during probation, he shall again 
comply with this notification requirement within seven days of accepting new 
employment and shall again submit proof of compliance to the Commission within five 
days of complying with this notification requirement.  
7. ABSTAIN FROM DRUGS AND ALCOHOL: Respondent shall completely 
abstain from the possession of, consumption of, or use of alcohol and/or controlled 
substances, except when ordered by a health care professional legally authorized to do 17 so as part of documented medical treatment. Respondent shall provide 
documentation of prescriptions, recommendations, orders, and treatment plans of 
health care professionals for the use of these prohibited substances within five days 
following the request  of the Commission.  
8. DRUG AND ALCOHOL TESTING: Respondent, at his expense, shall 
participate in a random, biological fluid testing or a drug screening program, approved by the Commission, for the detection of alcohol and controlled substances . The length 
of time and frequency will be subject to approval by the Commission. Respondent is 
responsible for keeping the Commission informed of his current telephone number at 
all times. Respondent shall also ensure that messages may be left at the tele phone 
number when he is not availab le and ensure that reports are submitted directly by the 
testing agency to the Commission, as directed. Any confirmed positive finding shall be 
reported immediately to the Commission by the program and shall be considered a 
violation of probation.  
No later than 30 days after the effective date of this decision and order, 
respondent shall have enrolled and registered with an approved drug and alcohol 
testing vendor; provided that vendor with any documentation, and any information 
necessary for payment by respondent; commenced testing protocols, including all 
required contacts with the testing vendor to determine testing dates; and begun 
testing. At all times, respondent shall fully cooperate with the testing vendor, and the 
Commission or its designee,  with regard to enrollment, registration, and payment for, 
and compliance with, testing. Any failure to cooperate shall be considered a violation 
of probation.  
Prior to any vacation or other period of absence from the area where the 
approved testing vendor provides services, respondent shall seek and receive approval 18 from the Commission or its designee to use an alternate testing vendor to ensure 
testing can occur. Upon approval, respondent shall enroll and register with the 
approved alternate drug testing vendor, provide to that alternate vendor any 
documentation required by the vendor, including any necessary payment by 
respondent. During the period of absence from the area, respondent shall commence 
testing protocols with the alternate vendor, including required daily contacts with the 
testing vendor to determine whe ther testing is required, and required testing. Any 
failure to timely seek or receive approval from the Commission or its designee, or to 
timely enroll and register with, timely commence testing protocols with, or timely 
undergo testing with, the alternate  testing vendor, shall be considered a violation of 
probation.  
Respondent shall execute and submit to the  Commission  any release of 
information forms that the Commission may require to monitor his  compliance with 
the terms of probation, including but not limited to the release of information forms concerning the results of bodily fluid testing performed by third parties.  
9. THERAPY OR COUNSELING: N o later than 30 days after the effective date 
of this decision and order, respondent shall at his expense, participate in therapy or 
counseling with a licensed psychologist or therapist competent to treat alcohol and 
substance use disorders, at intervals r ecommended by the psychologist or therapist, 
until the Commission releases him from this requirement . Documentation of 
respondent’s participation in therapy or counseling shall be submitted to the Commission at intervals required by  the Commission.  
10. ATTENDANCE AND PARTICIPATION IN GROUP SUPPORT MEETINGS: N o 
later than 30 days after the effective date of this decision and order, respondent shall 
begin attendance at an addictive behavior support group (e.g., Alcoholics Anonymous, 19 or other similar support group). Respondent shall attend at least one meeting of the 
support group per week for the duration of probation. Verified documentation of 
attendance shall be submitted at intervals required by the Commission.  
11. VIOLATION OF PROBATION: Failure to comply with the terms of 
probation shall constitute a violation of probation. If respondent violates  any term or 
condition of his probation, the Commission may refer the matter to the Attorney 
General’s Office to file a petition to revoke probation, and after giving respondent 
notice and an opportunity to be heard, may set aside the stay order and impose the 
stayed discipline. If dur ing the period of probation,  a petition to revoke probation has 
been filed against responde nt’s Credentials, the probationary period shall 
automatically be extended and shall not expire until final action is taken on the 
petition by the Commission.  
12. COMPLETION OF PROBATION: Upon successful completion of the terms 
of this probation, respondent’s credentials shall be fully restored.  
 
DATE: October 6, 2025  CHRISTOPHER W. DIETRICH  
Administrative Law Judge  
Office of Administrative Hearings
 
Christopher W. Dietrich (Oct 6, 2025 11:33:44 PDT)
